THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW

The Genealogy of Jesus Christ
1 The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. 
2 Abraham became the father of Isaac, and Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers, 3 and Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar, and Perez became the father of Hezron, and Hezron became the father of Aram, 4 and Aram became the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab became the father of Nahshon, and Nahshon became the father of Salmon, 5 and Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth, and Obed became the father of Jesse, 6 and Jesse became the father of David the king. 
And David became the father of Solomon by the wife﻿* of Uriah, 7 and Solomon became the father of Rehoboam, and Rehoboam became the father of Abijah, and Abijah became the father of Asa, 8 and Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram, and Joram became the father of Uzziah, 9 and Uzziah became the father of Jotham, and Jotham became the father of Ahaz, and Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah, 10 and Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh, and Manasseh became the father of Amon, and Amon became the father of Josiah, 11 and Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the deportation to Babylon. 
12 And after the deportation to Babylon, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel, and Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel, 13 and Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud, and Abiud became the father of Eliakim, and Eliakim became the father of Azor, 14 and Azor became the father of Zadok, and Zadok became the father of Achim, and Achim became the father of Eliud, 15 and Eliud became the father of Eleazar, and Eleazar became the father of Matthan, and Matthan became the father of Jacob, 16 and Jacob became the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary by whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. 
17 Therefore all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David to the deportation to Babylon are fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon to the Christ are fourteen generations. 
The Birth of Jesus Christ
18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ occurred in this way. His mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found ⌊to be pregnant⌋ by the Holy Spirit. 19 So Joseph her husband, being righteous and not wanting to disgrace her, intended to divorce her secretly. 20 But as﻿* he was considering these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife, for what has been conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. 21 And she will give birth to a son, and you will call his name ‘Jesus,’ because he will save his people from their sins.” 22 Now all this happened in order that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet would be fulfilled, saying, 
23 “Behold, the virgin ⌊will become pregnant⌋ and will give birth to a son, 
and they will call his name Emmanuel,” 
which is translated, “God with us.” 24 And Joseph, when he﻿* woke up from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and he took his wife 25 and ⌊did not have sexual relations with⌋ her until she gave birth to a son. And he called his name Jesus. 
Wise Men Visit Jesus
2 Now after﻿* Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, 2 saying, “Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? For we have seen his star at its rising and have come to worship him.” 3 And when﻿* King Herod heard it,* he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, 4 and after﻿* calling together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired from them where the Christ was to be born. 5 So they said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written by the prophet, 
6 ‘And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, 
are by no means least among the rulers of Judah, 
for from you will go out a ruler 
who will shepherd my people Israel.’ ” 
7 Then Herod secretly summoned the wise men and﻿* determined precisely from them the time when﻿* the star appeared. 8 And he sent them to Bethlehem and﻿* said, “Go, inquire carefully concerning the child, and when you have found him, report to me so that I also may come and﻿* worship him.” 9 After﻿* they listened to the king, they went out, and behold, the star which they had seen at its rising led them until it came and﻿* stood above the place where the child was. 10 Now when they﻿* saw the star, they rejoiced with very great joy. 11 And when they﻿* came into the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother, and they fell down and﻿* worshiped him. And opening their treasure boxes, they offered him gifts of gold and frankincense and myrrh. 12 And being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they went back to their own country by another route. 
Joseph, Mary, and Jesus Escape to Egypt
13 Now after they had gone away, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph, saying, “Get up, take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I tell you. For Herod is about to seek the child to destroy him.” 14 So he got up and﻿* took the child and his mother during the night and went away to Egypt. 15 And he was there until the death of Herod, in order that what was said by the Lord through the prophet would be fulfilled, saying, 
“Out of Egypt I called my son.” 
Herod Has Innocent Children Murdered
16 Then Herod, when he﻿* saw that he had been deceived by the wise men, became very angry, and he sent soldiers﻿* and﻿* executed all the children in Bethlehem and in all the region around it from the age of two years old and under, according to the time which he had determined precisely from the wise men. 17 Then what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled, saying, 
18 “A voice was heard in Ramah, 
weeping and great mourning, 
Rachel weeping for her children, 
and she did not want to be comforted, 
because ⌊they exist no longer⌋.” 
Joseph, Mary, and Jesus Return to Nazareth
19 Now after﻿* Herod had died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, 20 saying, “Get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the life of the child are dead.” 21 So he got up and﻿* took the child and his mother and ⌊entered⌋ the land of Israel. 22 But when he﻿* heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there, and being warned in a dream, he took refuge in the regions of Galilee. 23 And he came and﻿* lived in a town called Nazareth, in order that what was said by the prophets would be fulfilled: “He will be called a Nazarene.” 
John the Baptist Begins His Ministry
3 Now in those days John the Baptist came preaching in the Judean wilderness 2 and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near!” 3 For this is the one who was spoken about by the prophet Isaiah, saying, 
“The voice of one crying out in the wilderness, 
‘Prepare the way of the Lord, 
make his paths straight.’ ” 
4 Now John himself had his clothing made from camel’s hair and a belt made of leather around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey. 5 Then Jerusalem and all Judea and all the district around the Jordan were going out to him, 6 and they were being baptized by him in the Jordan River as they﻿* confessed their sins. 
7 But when he﻿* saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “Offspring of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath? 8 Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance! 9 And do not think to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones! 10 Already now the ax is positioned at the root of the trees; therefore every tree not producing good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. 11 I baptize you with water for repentance, but the one who comes after me is more powerful than I am, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. 12 His winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he will clean out his threshing floor and will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.” 
The Baptism of Jesus
13 Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John in order to be baptized by him. 14 But John tried to prevent﻿* him, saying, “⌊I need⌋ to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?” 15 But Jesus answered and﻿* said to him, “Permit it now, for in this way it is right for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he permitted him. 16 Now after he﻿* was baptized, Jesus immediately went up from the water, and behold, the heavens opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove coming upon him. 17 And behold, there was a voice from heaven saying, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.” 
The Temptation of Jesus
4 Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the devil, 2 and after he﻿* had fasted forty days and forty nights, then he was hungry. 3 And the tempter approached and﻿* said to him, “If you are the Son of God, order that these stones become bread.” 4 But he answered and﻿* said, “It is written, ‘Man will not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes out of the mouth of God.’ ” 
5 Then the devil took him to the holy city and placed him on the highest point of the temple 6 and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down! For it is written, 
‘He will command his angels concerning you,’ 
and 
‘On their hands they will lift you up, 
lest you strike your foot against a stone.’ ” 
7 Jesus said to him, “On the other hand it is written, ‘You are not to put the Lord your God to the test.’ ” 
8 Again the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory, 9 and he said to him, “I will give to you all these things, if you will fall down and﻿* worship me.” 10 Then Jesus said to him, “Go away, Satan, for it is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God and serve only him.’ ” 11 Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and began ministering to him. 
Public Ministry in Galilee
12 Now when he﻿* heard that John ⌊had been arrested⌋, he withdrew into Galilee. 13 And leaving Nazareth, he went and﻿* lived in Capernaum by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali, 14 in order that what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah would be fulfilled, who said, 
15 “Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, 
⌊toward the sea⌋, on the other side of the Jordan, 
Galilee of the Gentiles— 
16 the people who sit in darkness 
have seen a great light, 
and the ones who sit in the land and shadow of death, 
a light has dawned on them.” 
17 From that time on, Jesus began to preach and to say, “Repent, because the kingdom of heaven is near.” 
Jesus Calls His First Disciples
18 Now as he﻿* was walking beside the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon called Peter and his brother Andrew, throwing a casting net into the sea (for they were fishermen). 19 And he said to them, “⌊Follow me⌋ and I will make you fishers of people.” 20 And immediately they left their nets and﻿* followed him. 21 And going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, in the boat with their father Zebedee, mending their nets, and he called them. 22 And immediately they left the boat and their father and﻿* followed him. 
Teaching, Preaching, and Healing throughout Galilee
23 And he went around through all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and every sickness among the people. 24 And a report about him went out ⌊throughout⌋ Syria, and they brought to him all those ⌊who were sick⌋ with various diseases and afflicted by torments, demon-possessed and epileptics and paralytics, and he healed them. 25 And large crowds followed him from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from the other side of the Jordan. 
The Sermon on the Mount: The Beatitudes
5 Now when he﻿* saw the crowds, he went up the mountain and after he﻿* sat down, his disciples approached him. 2 And opening his mouth he began to teach them, saying, 
3 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, 
because theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
4 Blessed are the ones who mourn, 
because they will be comforted. 
5 Blessed are the meek, 
because they will inherit the earth. 
6 Blessed are the ones who hunger and thirst for righteousness, 
because they will be satisfied. 
7 Blessed are the merciful, 
because they will be shown mercy. 
8 Blessed are the pure in heart, 
because they will see God. 
9 Blessed are the peacemakers, 
because they will be called sons of God. 
10 Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, 
because theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
11 Blessed are you 
when they insult you and persecute you and say all kinds of evil things against you, lying on account of me. 12 Rejoice and be glad, because your reward is great in heaven, for in the same way they persecuted the prophets before you. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Salt and Light
13 “You are the salt of the earth. But if salt becomes tasteless, by what will it be made salty? It is good for nothing any longer except to be thrown outside and﻿* trampled under foot by people. 14 You are the light of the world. A city located on top of a hill cannot be hidden, 15 nor do they light a lamp and place it under a basket, but on a lampstand, and it shines on all those in the house. 16 In the same way let your light shine before people, so that they can see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven. 
The Sermon on the Mount: The Law and the Prophets Fulfilled
17 “Do not think that I have come to destroy the law or the prophets. I have not come to destroy them but to fulfill them. 18 For truly I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not one tiny letter or one stroke of a letter will pass away from the law until all takes place. 19 Therefore whoever abolishes one of the least of these commandments and teaches people to do so will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever keeps them and teaches them, this person will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 20 For I say to you that unless your righteousness greatly surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Anger Toward Others
21 “You have heard that it was said to the ⌊people of old⌋, ‘Do not commit murder,’ and ‘whoever commits murder will be subject to judgment.’ 22 But I say to you that everyone who is angry at his brother will be subject to judgment, and whoever says to his brother, ‘Stupid fool!’ will be subject to the council, and whoever says, ‘Obstinate fool!’ will be subject to fiery hell. 23 Therefore if you present your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you, 24 leave your gift there before the altar and first go be reconciled to your brother, and then come and﻿* present your gift. 25 ⌊Settle the case quickly with your accuser⌋ while you are with him on the way, lest your accuser hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and you be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I say to you, you will never come out of there until you have paid back the last penny! 
The Sermon on the Mount: Adultery and Lust
27 “You have heard that it was said, ‘Do not commit adultery.’ 28 But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman to lust for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart. 29 And if your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it from you! For it is better for you that one of your members be destroyed than your whole body be thrown into hell. 30 And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it from you! For it is better for you that one of your limbs be destroyed than your whole body go into hell. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Divorce
31 “And it was said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’ 32 But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife, except for a matter of sexual immorality, causes her to commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Taking Oaths
33 “Again you have heard that it was said to the ⌊people of old⌋, ‘Do not swear falsely, but fulfill your oaths to the Lord.’ 34 But I say to you, do not swear at all, either by heaven, because it is the throne of God, 35 or by the earth, because it is the footstool of his feet, or by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great king. 36 And do not swear by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black. 37 But let your statement be ‘Yes, yes; no, no,’ and anything beyond these is from the evil one. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Retaliation
38 “You have heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’ 39 But I say to you, do not resist the evildoer, but whoever strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other to him also. 40 And the one who wants to go to court with you and take your tunic, ⌊let him have⌋ your outer garment also. 41 And whoever forces you to go one mile, go with him two. 42 Give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Love for Enemies
43 “You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor’ and ‘Hate your enemy.’ 44 But I say to you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, 45 in order that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven, because he causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and he sends rain on the just and the unjust. 46 For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Do not the tax collectors also do the same? 47 And if you greet only your brothers, what are you doing that is remarkable? Do not the Gentiles also do the same? 48 Therefore you be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Charitable Giving
6 “And take care not to practice your righteousness before people to be seen by them; ⌊otherwise⌋ you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven. 2 Therefore whenever you practice charitable giving, do not sound a trumpet in front of you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, in order that they may be praised by people. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward in full! 3 But you, when you﻿* practice charitable giving, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, 4 in order that your charitable giving may be in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you. 
The Sermon on the Mount: How to Pray
5 And whenever you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, because they love to stand and﻿* pray in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets, in order that they may be seen by people. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward in full! 6 But whenever you pray, enter into your inner room and shut your door and﻿* pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you. 
7 “But when you﻿* pray, do not babble repetitiously like the pagans, for they think that because of their many words they will be heard. 8 Therefore do not be like them, for your Father knows ⌊what you need⌋ before you ask him. 9 Therefore you pray in this way: 
“Our Father who is in heaven, 
may your name be treated as holy. 
10 May your kingdom come, 
may your will be done 
on earth as it is in heaven. 
11 Give us today our daily bread, 
12 and forgive us our debts, 
as we also have forgiven our debtors. 
13 And do not bring us into temptation, 
but deliver us from the evil one. 
14 For if you forgive people their sins, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. 15 But if you do not forgive people, neither will your Father forgive your sins. 
The Sermon on the Mount: How to Fast
16 “Whenever you fast, do not be sullen like the hypocrites, for they make their faces unrecognizable in order that they may be seen fasting by people. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward in full! 17 But when﻿* you are fasting, ⌊put olive oil on your head⌋ and wash your face 18 so that you will not be seen by people as fasting, but to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Treasure in Heaven
19 “Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and consuming insect destroy and where thieves break in and steal, 20 but store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor consuming insect destroy and where thieves do not break in or steal. 21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. 
22 “The eye is the lamp of the body. Therefore if your eye is sincere, your whole body will be full of light. 23 But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be dark. Therefore if the light in you is darkness, how great is the darkness! 
24 “No one is able to serve two masters. For either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You are not able to serve God and money. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Anxiety
25 “For this reason I say to you, do not be anxious for your life, what you will eat, and not for your body, what you will wear. Is your life not more than food and your body more than clothing? 26 Consider the birds of the sky, that they do not sow or reap or gather produce into barns, and your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are? 27 And who among you, by﻿* being anxious, is able to add one hour to his life span? 28 And why are you anxious about clothing? Observe the lilies of the field, how they grow: they do not toil or spin, 29 but I say to you that not even Solomon in all his glory was dressed like one of these. 30 But if God dresses the grass of the field in this way, although it﻿* is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not do so much more for you, you of little faith? 31 Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What will we eat?’ or ‘What will we drink?’ or ‘What will we wear?,’ 32 for the pagans seek after all these things. For your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. 33 But seek first his kingdom and righteousness, and all these things will be added to you. 34 Therefore do not be anxious for tomorrow, because tomorrow will be anxious for itself. ⌊Each day has enough trouble of its own.⌋ 
The Sermon on the Mount: On Judging Others
7 “Do not judge, so that you will not be judged. 2 For by what judgment you judge, you will be judged, and by what measure you measure out, it will be measured out to you. 3 And why do you see the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but do not notice the beam of wood in your own eye? 4 Or how will you say to your brother, ‘Allow me to remove the speck from your eye,’ and behold, the beam of wood is in your own eye? 5 Hypocrite! First remove the beam of wood from your own eye and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye! 
6 “Do not give what is holy to dogs, or throw your pearls in front of pigs, lest they trample them with their feet, and turn around and﻿* tear you to pieces. 
The Sermon on the Mount: Ask, Seek, Knock
7 “Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and it will be opened for you. 8 For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened. 9 Or what man is there among you, if his son will ask him for bread, will give him a stone? 10 Or also if he will ask for a fish, will give him a snake? 11 Therefore if you, although you﻿* are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him? 12 Therefore in all things, whatever you want that people should do to you, thus also you do to them. For this is the law and the prophets. 
The Sermon on the Mount: The Narrow Gate
13 “Enter through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate and spacious is the road that leads to destruction, and there are many who enter through it, 14 because narrow is the gate and constricted is the road that leads to life, and there are few who find it! 
The Sermon on the Mount: Recognizing False Prophets
15 “Beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inside are ravenous wolves. 16 You will recognize them by their fruits: they do not gather grapes from thorn bushes or figs from thistles, do they? 17 In the same way, every good tree produces good fruit, but a bad tree produces bad fruit. 18 A good tree is not able to produce bad fruit, nor a bad tree to produce good fruit. 19 Every tree that does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. 20 As a result, you will recognize them by their fruits. 
The Sermon on the Mount: False Followers
21 “Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of heaven, but the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. 22 On that day many will say to me, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and expel demons in your name, and perform many miracles in your name?’ 23 And then ⌊I will say to them plainly⌋, ‘I never knew you. Depart from me, you who practice lawlessness!’ 
The Sermon on the Mount: Two Houses and Two Foundations
24 “Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine and does them will be like a wise man who built his house on the rock. 25 And the rain came down and the rivers came and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it did not collapse, because its foundation was laid on the rock. 26 And everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand. 27 And the rain came down and the rivers came and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it collapsed, and its fall was great.” 
The Sermon on the Mount: Response
28 And it happened when Jesus finished these words the crowds were amazed at his teaching, 29 because he was teaching them like one who had authority, and not like their scribes. 
A Leper Cleansed
8 And when﻿* he came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him. 2 And behold, a leper approached and﻿* worshiped him, saying, “Lord, if you are willing, you are able to make me clean.” 3 And extending his hand he touched him, saying, “I am willing, be clean.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 4 And Jesus said to him, “See that you tell no one, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.” 
A Centurion’s Slave Healed
5 Now when﻿* he entered Capernaum, a centurion approached him, appealing to him 6 and saying, “Lord, my slave is lying paralyzed in my house, terribly tormented!” 7 And he said to him, “I will come and﻿* heal him.” 8 And the centurion answered and﻿* said, “Lord, I am not worthy that you should come in under my roof. But only say the word and my slave will be healed. 9 For I also am a man under authority who has soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another one, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.” 
10 Now when﻿* Jesus heard this,* he was astonished, and said to those who were following him,* “Truly I say to you, I have found such great faith with no one in Israel. 11 But I say to you that many will come from east and west and ⌊be seated at the banquet⌋ with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. 12 But the sons of the kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth!” 13 And Jesus said to the centurion, “Go, as you have believed it will be done for you.” And the slave was healed at that hour. 
Many at Capernaum Are Healed
14 And when﻿* Jesus came into Peter’s house, he saw his mother-in-law lying down and suffering with a fever. 15 And he touched her hand and the fever left her, and she got up and began to serve him. 
16 Now when it﻿* was evening, they brought to him many who were demon-possessed, and he expelled the spirits with a word. And he healed all ⌊those who were sick⌋, 17 in order that what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah would be fulfilled, who said, 
“He himself took away our sicknesses, 
and carried away our diseases.” 
Would-be Followers
18 Now when﻿* Jesus saw many crowds around him, he gave orders to depart to the other side. 19 And a scribe approached and﻿* said to him, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go!” 20 And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.” 21 And another of the disciples said to him, “Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.” 22 But Jesus said to him, “Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead!” 
Calming of a Storm
23 And as﻿* he got into the boat, his disciples followed him. 24 And behold, a great storm arose on the sea, so that the boat was being inundated by the waves, but he himself was asleep. 25 And they came and﻿* woke him, saying, “Lord, save us!* We are perishing!” 26 And he said to them, “Why are you fearful, you of little faith?” Then he got up and﻿* rebuked the winds and the sea and there was a great calm. 27 And the men were astonished, saying, “What sort of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?” 
Demon-possessed Gadarenes Healed
28 And when﻿* he came to the other side, to the region of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from among the tombs met him, very violent, so that no one was able to pass by along that road. 29 And behold, they cried out, saying, “⌊What do you have to do with us⌋, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?” 30 Now a long way from them a large herd of pigs was feeding. 31 So the demons implored him, saying, “If you are going to expel us, send us into the herd of pigs.” 32 And he said to them, “Go!” So they departed and﻿* went into the pigs, and behold, the whole herd rushed headlong down the steep slope into the sea and drowned in the water. 33 Now the herdsmen fled and went into the town and﻿* reported everything, including the things concerning the demon-possessed men. 34 And behold, the whole town came out to meet Jesus, and when they﻿* saw him, they implored him﻿* that he would depart from their region. 
A Paralytic Healed
9 And getting into a boat, he crossed over and came to his own town. 2 And behold, they brought to him a paralytic lying on a stretcher, and when﻿* Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Have courage, child, your sins are forgiven.” 3 And behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This man is blaspheming!” 4 And knowing their thoughts, Jesus said, “Why do you think evil in your hearts? 5 For which is easier to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’? 6 But in order that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins,” then he said to the paralytic, “Get up, pick up your stretcher and go to your home.” 7 And he got up and﻿* went to his home. 8 But when﻿* the crowds saw this,* they were afraid and glorified God who had given such authority to men. 
Matthew Called to Follow Jesus
9 And as﻿* Jesus was going away from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth and said to him, “Follow me!” And he stood up and﻿* followed him. 
10 And it happened as﻿* he ⌊was dining⌋ in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners were coming and﻿* ⌊dining⌋ with Jesus and his disciples. 11 And when they﻿* saw it,* the Pharisees began to say to his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?” 12 And when he﻿* heard it,* he said, “Those who are healthy do not have need of a physician, but those ⌊who are sick⌋. 13 But go and﻿* learn what it means, “I want mercy and not sacrifice.” For I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners.” 
On Fasting
14 Then the disciples of John approached him, saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples do not fast?” 15 And Jesus said to them, “⌊The bridegroom’s attendants⌋ are not able to mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them. But days are coming when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast. 16 But no one puts a patch of unshrunken cloth on an old garment, for its patch pulls away from the garment, and the tear becomes worse. 17 Nor do they put new wine into old wineskins. ⌊Otherwise⌋ the wineskins burst and the wine is spilled, and the wineskins are destroyed. But they put new wine into new wineskins and both are preserved.” 
A Woman Healed and a Daughter Raised
18 As﻿* he was saying these things to them, behold, one of the rulers came and﻿* knelt down before him, saying, “My daughter has just now died, but come, place your hand on her and she will live!” 19 And Jesus and his disciples got up and﻿* followed him. 20 And behold, a woman who had been suffering with a hemorrhage twelve years approached from behind and﻿* touched the edge of his cloak, 21 for she said to herself, “If only I touch his cloak I will be healed.” 22 But Jesus, turning around and seeing her, said, “Have courage, daughter! Your faith has healed you.” And the woman was healed from that hour. 
23 And when﻿* Jesus came into the ruler’s house and saw the flute players and the disorderly crowd, 24 he said, “Go away, because the girl is not dead, but is sleeping.” And they ridiculed him. 25 But when the crowd had been sent out, he entered and﻿* took her hand, and the girl got up. 26 And this report went out into that whole region. 
Two Blind Men Healed
27 And as﻿* Jesus was going away from there, two blind men followed him, crying out and saying, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!” 28 And when he﻿* came into the house, the blind men approached him, and Jesus said to them, “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” They said to him, “Yes, Lord.” 29 Then he touched their eyes, saying, “According to your faith let it be done for you.” 30 And their eyes were opened, and Jesus sternly warned them, saying, “See that no one finds out.” 31 But they went out and﻿* spread the report about him in that whole region. 
A Demon Expelled
32 Now as﻿* they were going away, behold, they brought to him a demon-possessed man who was unable to speak. 33 And after﻿* the demon had been expelled, the one who had been mute spoke, and the crowds were astonished, saying, “⌊This has never been seen before⌋ in Israel!” 34 But the Pharisees were saying, “By the ruler of demons he expels the demons!” 
A Plentiful Harvest But Few Workers
35 And Jesus was going around all the towns and the villages, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and every sickness. 36 And when he﻿* saw the crowds, he had compassion for them, because they were weary and dejected, like sheep that did not have a shepherd. 37 Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. 38 Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest that he send out workers into his harvest.” 
The Twelve Commissioned and Sent Out
10 And summoning his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over unclean spirits, so that they could expel them﻿* and could heal every disease and every sickness. 2 Now these are the names of the twelve apostles: first Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, 3 Philip, and Bartholomew, Thomas, and Matthew the tax collector, James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, 4 Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot—the one who also betrayed him. 
5 Jesus sent out these twelve, instructing them saying, “Do not go on the road to the Gentiles, and do not enter into a city of the Samaritans, 6 but go instead to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 7 And as you﻿* are going, preach, saying, ‘The kingdom of heaven has come near!’ 8 Heal those who are sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, expel demons. Freely you have received; freely give. 9 Do not procure gold or silver or copper for your belts. 10 Do not take a traveler’s bag for the road, or two tunics, or sandals, or a staff, for the worker is deserving of his provisions. 11 And into whatever town or village you enter, inquire who in it is worthy, and stay there until you depart. 12 And when you﻿* enter into the house, greet it. 13 And if the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you. 14 And whoever does not welcome you or listen to your words, shake off the dust from your feet as you﻿* are going out of that house or that town. 15 Truly I say to you, it will be more bearable for the region of Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town! 
Persecution of Disciples Predicted
16 “Behold, I am sending you out like sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents and innocent as doves. 17 But beware of people, because they will hand you over to councils, and they will flog you in their synagogues. 18 And you will be brought before both governors and kings because of me, for a witness to them and to the Gentiles. 19 But whenever they hand you over, do not be anxious how to speak﻿* or what you should say, for what you should say will be given to you at that hour. 20 For you are not the ones who are speaking, but the Spirit of your Father who is speaking through you. 
21 “And brother will hand over brother to death, and a father his children, and children will rise up against parents and have them put to death, 22 and you will be hated by everyone because of my name. But the one who endures to the end—this one will be saved. 23 And whenever they persecute you in this town, flee to another, for truly I say to you, you will never finish going through the towns of Israel until the Son of Man comes. 
24 “A disciple is not superior to his teacher, nor a slave superior to his master. 25 It is enough for the disciple that he become like his teacher, and the slave like his master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more the members of his household? 
Fear God Rather Than People
26 “Therefore do not be afraid of them, because nothing is hidden that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not become known. 27 What I say to you in the dark, tell in the light, and what you hear in your ear, proclaim on the housetops. 28 And do not be afraid of those who kill the body but are not able to kill the soul, but instead be afraid of the one who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. 29 Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And one of them will not fall to the ground ⌊without the knowledge and consent⌋ of your Father. 30 And even the hairs of your head are all numbered! 31 Therefore do not be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows. 
32 “Therefore everyone who acknowledges me before people, I also will acknowledge him before my Father who is in heaven. 33 But whoever denies me before people, I also will deny him before my Father who is in heaven. 
Not Peace, But a Sword of Divisiveness
34 “Do not think that I have come to bring peace on the earth! I have not come to bring peace, but a sword. 35 For I have come to turn a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. 36 And the enemies of a man will be the members of his household. 37 The one who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and the one who loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. 38 And whoever does not take up his cross and follow me is not worthy of me. 39 The one who finds his life will lose it, and the one who loses his life because of me will find it. 
On Rewards
40 “The one who receives you receives me, and the one who receives me receives the one who sent me. 41 The one who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward, and the one who receives a righteous person in the name of a righteous person will receive a righteous person’s reward. 42 And whoever gives one of these little ones only a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you, he will never lose his reward.” 
A Question from John the Baptist
11 And it happened that when Jesus had finished giving orders to his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and to preach in their towns. 2 Now when﻿* John heard in prison the deeds of Christ, he sent word﻿* by his disciples 3 and﻿* said to him, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?” 4 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Go and﻿* tell John what you hear and see: 5 the blind receive sight and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and the poor have good news announced to them.* 6 And whoever is not offended by me is blessed.” 
7 Now as﻿* these were going away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 8 But what did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in the houses of kings. 9 But why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and even more than a prophet! 10 It is this man about whom it is written: 
‘Behold, I am sending my messenger before your face, 
who will prepare your way before you.’ 
11 Truly I say to you, among those born of women there has not arisen one greater than John the Baptist. But the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 12 But from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven is treated violently, and the violent claim it. 13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John, 14 and if you are willing to accept it,* he is Elijah, the one who is going to come. 15 The one who has ears, let him hear! 
16 “But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces who call out to one another, 17 saying, 
‘We played the flute for you and you did not dance; 
we sang a lament and you did not mourn.’ 
18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon!’ 19 The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Behold, a man who is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ But wisdom is vindicated by her deeds.” 
Woes Pronounced on Unrepentant Towns
20 Then he began to reproach the towns in which the majority of his miracles had been done, because they did not repent: 21 “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 22 Nevertheless I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and for Sidon on the day of judgment than for you! 23 And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? No, you will be brought down to Hades! For if the miracles done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until today. 24 Nevertheless I tell you that it will be more bearable for the region of Sodom on the day of judgment than for you!” 
A Yoke That Is Easy
25 At that time Jesus answered and﻿* said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and have revealed them to young children. 26 Yes, Father, for to do so ⌊was your gracious will⌋. 27 All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and ⌊anyone to whom⌋ the Son wants to reveal him.* 28 Come to me, all of you who labor and are burdened, and I will give you rest. 29 Take my yoke on you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. 30 For my yoke is easy to carry and my burden is light.” 
Plucking Grain on the Sabbath
12 At that time Jesus went through the grain fields on the Sabbath. And his disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck off heads of grain and eat them.* 2 But when﻿* the Pharisees saw it,* they said to him, “Behold, your disciples are doing what it is not permitted to do on the Sabbath!” 3 So he said to them, “Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, and those with him, 4 how he entered into the house of God and ate the bread of the presentation, which it was not permitted for him or for those with him to eat, but only for the priests? 5 Or have you not read in the law that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple violate the sanctity of the Sabbath and are guiltless? 6 But I tell you that something greater than the temple is here! 7 And if you had known what ⌊it means⌋, ‘I want mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless. 8 For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.” 
A Man with a Withered Hand Healed
9 And going on from there he came into their synagogue. 10 And behold, there was a man who had a withered hand, and they asked him, saying, “Is it permitted to heal on the Sabbath?” in order that they could accuse him. 11 But he said to them, “What man will there be among you who will have one sheep and if this one fell into a pit on the Sabbath, will not take hold of it and lift it﻿* out? 12 Then to what degree is a man worth more than a sheep? So then, it is permitted to do good on the Sabbath.” 
13 Then he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand,” and he stretched it﻿* out, and it was restored as healthy as the other one. 14 But the Pharisees went out ⌊and plotted⌋ against him in order that they could destroy him. 
God’s Chosen Servant
15 Now Jesus, when he﻿* learned of it,* withdrew from there, and many followed him, and he healed them all. 16 And he warned them that they should not ⌊reveal his identity⌋, 17 in order that what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah would be fulfilled, who said, 
18 “Behold my servant whom I have chosen, 
my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased. 
I will put my Spirit on him, 
and he will proclaim justice to the Gentiles. 
19 He will not quarrel or cry out, 
nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets. 
20 A crushed reed he will not break, 
and a smoldering wick he will not extinguish, 
until he brings justice to victory. 
21 And in his name the Gentiles will hope. 
A House Divided Cannot Stand
22 Then a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute was brought to him. And he healed him so that the man who was mute could speak and see. 23 And all the crowds were amazed and began saying, “Perhaps this one is the Son of David!” 24 But the Pharisees, when they﻿* heard it,* said, “This man does not expel demons except by Beelzebul the ruler of demons!” 25 But knowing their thoughts, he said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and every city or household divided against itself will not stand. 26 And if Satan expels Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand? 27 And if I expel demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons expel them?* For this reason they will be your judges! 28 But if I expel demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you! 29 Or how can someone enter into the house of a strong man and steal his property, unless he first ties up the strong man? And then he can thoroughly plunder his house. 30 The one who is not with me is against me, and the one who does not gather with me scatters. 31 For this reason I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven! 32 And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him. But whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him either in this age or in the coming one! 
Good Trees and Good Fruit or Bad Trees and Bad Fruit
33 “Either make the tree good and its fruit is good, or make the tree bad and its fruit is bad, for the tree is known by its fruit. 34 Offspring of vipers! How are you able to say good things when you﻿* are evil? For from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 35 The good person from his good treasury brings out good things, and the evil person from his evil treasury brings out evil things. 36 But I tell you that every worthless word that they speak, people will give an account for it on the day of judgment! 37 For by your words you will be vindicated, and by your words you will be condemned.” 
The Sign of Jonah
38 Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him saying, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you!” 39 But he answered and﻿* said to them, “An evil and adulterous generation desires a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah! 40 For just as Jonah was in the belly of the huge fish three days and three nights, so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights. 41 The people of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they repented at the proclamation of Jonah, and behold, something﻿* greater than Jonah is here! 42 The queen of the south will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something﻿* greater than Solomon is here! 
An Unclean Spirit Returns
43 “Now whenever an unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it travels through waterless places searching for rest, and does not find it.* 44 Then it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came out.’ And when it﻿* arrives it finds the house﻿* unoccupied and swept and put in order. 45 Then it goes and brings along with itself seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go in and﻿* live there. And the last state of that person becomes worse than the first. So it will be for this evil generation also!” 
Jesus’ Mother and Brothers
46 And while﻿* he was still speaking to the crowds, behold, his mother and brothers were standing there outside, desiring to speak to him. 47 And someone told him, “Behold, your mother and your brothers are standing there outside desiring to speak to you.” 48 But he answered and﻿* said to the one who told him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?” 49 And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he said, “Behold my mother and my brothers! 50 For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother and sister and mother.” 
The Parable of the Sower
13 On that day Jesus went out of the house and﻿* was sitting by the sea. 2 And large crowds gathered close around him, so that he got into a boat to sit down, and all the crowd was standing on the shore. 3 And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying, “Behold, the sower went out to sow, 4 and while he was sowing, ⌊some seed⌋ fell on the side of the path, and the birds came and﻿* devoured it. 5 And other seed fell on the rocky ground, where it did not have much soil, and it sprang up at once because it did not have any depth of soil. 6 But when﻿* the sun rose it was scorched, and because it did not have enough root, it withered. 7 And other seed fell among the thorn plants, and the thorn plants came up and choked it. 8 But other seed fell on the good soil and produced grain, this one a hundred times as much and this one sixty and this one thirty. 9 The one who has ears, let him hear!” 
The Reason for the Parables
10 And the disciples came up and﻿* said to him, “⌊Why⌋ do you speak to them in parables?” 11 And he answered and﻿* said to them, “To you it has been granted to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to those people it has not been granted. 12 For whoever has, to him more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. 13 For this reason I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand, 14 and with reference to them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says, 
“⌊You will listen carefully⌋ and will never understand, 
and ⌊you will look closely⌋ and will never perceive. 
15 For the heart of this people has become dull, 
and with their ears they hear with difficulty, 
and they have shut their eyes, 
so that they would not see with their eyes 
and hear with their ears 
and understand with their heart 
and turn, and I would heal them.” 
16 But your eyes are blessed because they see, and your ears because they hear. 17 For truly I say to you that many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see, and did not see it,* and to hear what you hear, and did not hear it!* 
The Parable of the Sower Interpreted
18 “You, therefore, listen to the parable of the sower: 19 When﻿* anyone hears the word about the kingdom and does not understand it,* the evil one comes and snatches away what was sown in his heart. This is what was sown on the side of the path. 20 And what was sown on the rocky ground—this is the one who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy. 21 But he does not have a root in himself, but ⌊lasts only a little while⌋, and when﻿* affliction or persecution happens because of the word, immediately he falls away. 22 And what was sown into the thorn plants—this is the one who hears the word, and the anxiety of this world and the deceitfulness of wealth choke the word and it becomes unproductive. 23 But what was sown on the good soil—this is the one who hears the word and understands it,* who indeed bears fruit and produces, this one a hundred times as much, and this one sixty, and this one thirty.” 
The Parable of the Weeds Among the Wheat
24 He put before them another parable, saying, “The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a man who sowed good seed in his field. 25 But while his people were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed darnel in the midst of the wheat and went away. 26 So when the ⌊wheat⌋ sprouted and yielded grain, then the darnel appeared also. 27 So the slaves of the master of the house came and﻿* said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow good seed in your field? How then does it have darnel?’ 28 And he said to them, ‘An enemy has done this!’ So the slaves said to him, ‘Then do you want us to go and﻿* gather them?’ 29 But he said, “No, lest when you﻿* gather the darnel you uproot the wheat together with it. 30 Let both grow together until the harvest, and at the season of the harvest I will tell the reapers, “First gather the darnel and tie it into bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into my storehouse.” ’ ” 
The Parable of the Mustard Seed
31 He put before them another parable, saying, “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed that a man took and﻿* sowed in his field. 32 ⌊It⌋ is the smallest of all the seeds, but when it is grown it is larger than the garden herbs and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the sky come and nest in its branches.” 
The Parable of the Yeast
33 He told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and﻿* put into three measures of wheat flour until the whole batch was leavened.” 
Parables Fulfill Prophecy
34 Jesus spoke all these things to the crowds in parables, and he was saying nothing to them without a parable, 35 in order that what was spoken through the prophet would be fulfilled, who said, 
“I will open my mouth in parables; 
I will proclaim what has been hidden since the creation.”  
The Parable of the Weeds Interpreted
36 Then he left the crowds and﻿* came into the house, and his disciples came to him saying, “Explain the parable of the darnel in the field to us.” 37 So he answered and﻿* said, “The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man, 38 and the field is the world. And the good seed—these are the sons of the kingdom, but the darnel are the sons of the evil one. 39 And the enemy who sowed them is the devil, and the harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels. 40 Thus just as the darnel is gathered and burned with fire, so it will be at the end of the age. 41 The Son of Man will send out his angels and they will gather out of his kingdom all the causes of sin and those who do lawless deeds, 42 and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth! 43 Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. The one who has ears, let him hear! 
The Parable of the Treasure Hidden in a Field
44 “The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, that a man found and﻿* concealed, and in his joy he goes and sells everything that he has and buys that field. 
The Parable of the Valuable Pearl
45 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant searching for fine pearls. 46 And when he﻿* found one very valuable pearl, he went and﻿* sold everything that he possessed and purchased it. 
The Parable of the Dragnet
47 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a dragnet that was thrown into the sea and gathered fish﻿* of every kind, 48 which when it was filled they pulled to shore and sat down and﻿* collected the good fish﻿* into containers, but the bad they threw out. 49 Thus it will be at the end of the age. The angels will go out and separate the evil from among the righteous 50 and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth! 
51 “Have you understood all these things?” They said to him, “Yes.” 52 And he said to them, “For this reason every scribe who has been trained for the kingdom of heaven is like the master of the house who brings out of his storeroom new things and old things.” 
Rejected at Nazareth
53 And it happened that when Jesus had finished these parables he went away from there. 54 And he came to his hometown and﻿* began to teach them in their synagogue, so that they were amazed and said, “From where did this man get this wisdom and these miracles? 55 Is not this one the son of the carpenter? Is not his mother called Mary and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas? 56 And are not all his sisters with us? From where then did this man get all these things?” 57 And they were offended by him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his own hometown and in his own household.” 58 And he did not perform many miracles in that place because of their unbelief. 
Herod Kills John the Baptist
14 At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the report about Jesus 2 and he said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist! He has been raised from the dead, and for this reason miraculous powers are at work in him.” 3 For Herod, after﻿* arresting John, bound him and put him﻿* in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, 4 because John had been saying to him, “It is not permitted for you to have her.” 5 And although he﻿* wanted to kill him, he feared the crowd, because they looked upon him as a prophet. 
6 But when﻿* Herod’s birthday celebration took place, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst of them and pleased Herod. 7 Therefore he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked. 8 And coached by her mother, she said, “Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a platter!” 9 And although﻿* the king was distressed, because of his oaths and his ⌊dinner guests⌋ he commanded the request﻿* to be granted. 10 And he sent orders﻿* and﻿* had John beheaded in the prison, 11 and his head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it﻿* to her mother. 12 And his disciples came and﻿* took away the corpse and buried it, and went and﻿* told Jesus. 
The Feeding of Five Thousand
13 Now when﻿* Jesus heard it,* he withdrew from there in a boat to an isolated place by himself. And when﻿* the crowds heard it,* they followed him by land from the towns. 14 And as he﻿* got out, he saw the large crowd and had compassion on them and healed their sick. 15 Now when it﻿* was evening, the disciples came to him saying, “The place is desolate and the hour ⌊is late⌋. Release the crowds so that they can go away into the villages and﻿* purchase food for themselves.” 16 But Jesus said to them, “They do not ⌊need⌋ to go away. You give them something﻿* to eat.” 17 And they said to him, “We do not have anything﻿* here except five loaves and two fish.” 18 So he said, “Bring them here to me.” 19 And he commanded the crowds to recline for a meal on the grass. Taking the five loaves and the two fish and﻿* looking up to heaven, he gave thanks. And after﻿* breaking them,* he gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples gave them﻿* to the crowds. 20 And they all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up what was left over of the broken pieces, twelve baskets full. 21 Now those who ate were about five thousand men, in addition to women and children. 
Jesus Walks on the Water
22 And immediately he made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side, while he sent away the crowds. 23 And after he﻿* sent away the crowds, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. So when﻿* evening came, he was there alone. 24 But the boat was already many stadia distant from the land, being beaten by the waves, because the wind was against it. 25 And in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea. 26 But the disciples, when they﻿* saw him walking on the sea, were terrified, saying, “It is a ghost!” and they cried out in fear. 27 But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, “Have courage, I am he! Do not be afraid!” 28 And Peter answered him and﻿* said, “Lord, if ⌊it is you⌋, command me to come to you on the water!” 29 So he said, “Come!” And getting out of the boat, Peter walked on the water and came toward Jesus. 30 But when he﻿* saw the strong wind, he was afraid. And beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, “Lord, save me!” 31 And immediately Jesus extended his hand and﻿* caught him and said to him, “You of little faith! Why did you doubt?” 32 And when﻿* they got into the boat, the wind abated. 33 So those in the boat worshiped him, saying, “Truly you are the Son of God!” 
Many Healed at Gennesaret
34 And after they﻿* had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret. 35 And when﻿* the men of that place recognized him, they sent word into that whole surrounding region, and they brought to him all those ⌊who were sick⌋. 36 And they were imploring him that they might only touch the edge of his cloak, and all those who touched it﻿* were cured. 
Human Traditions and God’s Commandments
15 Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying, 2 “Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they eat ⌊a meal⌋.” 3 So he answered and﻿* said to them, “Why do you also break the commandment of God because of your tradition? 4 For God said, ‘Honor your﻿* father and your﻿* mother,’ and ‘The one who speaks evil of father or mother ⌊must certainly die⌋.’ 5 But you say, ‘Whoever says to his﻿* father or his﻿* mother, “Whatever ⌊benefit you would have received⌋ from me is a gift to God,” 6 need not honor his father,’ and you make void the word of God for the sake of your tradition. 7 Hypocrites! Isaiah correctly prophesied about you saying, 
8 ‘This people honors me with their﻿* lips, 
but their heart is far, far away from me, 
9 and they worship me in vain, 
teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’ ” 
Defilement from Within
10 And summoning the crowd, he said to them, “Hear and understand: 11 It is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person, but what comes out of the mouth—this defiles a person.” 12 Then the disciples came and﻿* said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they﻿* heard this saying?” 13 And he answered and﻿* said, “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted. 14 Let them! They are blind guides of the blind. And if the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit.” 15 But Peter answered and﻿* said to him, “Explain this parable to us.” 16 But he said, “Are you also still without understanding? 17 Do you not understand that everything that enters into the mouth goes into the stomach and is evacuated into the latrine? 18 But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these defile the person. 19 For from the heart come evil plans, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false witness, abusive speech. 20 These are the things that defile a person. But eating with unwashed hands does not defile a person!” 
A Canaanite Woman’s Great Faith
21 And departing from there, Jesus went away to the region of Tyre and Sidon. 22 And behold, a Canaanite woman from that district came and cried out, saying, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is severely possessed by a demon!” 23 But he did not answer her a word. And his disciples came up and﻿* asked him, saying, “Send her away, because she is crying out after us!” 24 But he answered and﻿* said, “I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” 25 But she came and﻿* knelt down before him, saying, “Lord, help me!” 26 And he answered and﻿* said, “It is not right to take the children’s bread and throw it﻿* to the dogs!” 27 So she said, “Yes, Lord, for even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master’s table.” 28 Then Jesus answered and said to her, “O woman, your faith is great! Let it be done for you as you want.” And her daughter was healed from that hour. 
Many Others Healed in Galilee
29 And departing from there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee, and he went up on the mountain and﻿* was sitting there. 30 And large crowds came to him, having with them the mute, blind, lame, crippled, and many others, and they put them down at his feet, and he healed them. 31 So then the crowd was astonished when they﻿* saw the mute speaking, the crippled healthy, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing, and they praised the God of Israel. 
The Feeding of Four Thousand
32 And Jesus summoned his disciples and﻿* said, “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have remained with me three days already and do not have anything to eat, and I do not want to send them away hungry lest they give out on the way.” 33 And the disciples said to him, “Where in this desolate place ⌊can we get⌋ so much bread that such a great crowd could be satisfied?” 34 And Jesus said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” So they said, “Seven, and a few little fish.” 35 And commanding the crowd to recline for a meal on the ground, 36 he took the seven loaves and the fish and after he﻿* had given thanks, he broke them﻿* and began giving them﻿* to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds. 37 And they all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up what was left over of the broken pieces, seven baskets full. 38 Now those who ate were four thousand men, in addition to women and children. 39 And after he﻿* sent away the crowds, he got into the boat and went to the region of Magadan. 
The Signs of the Times
16 And when﻿* the Pharisees and Sadducees came to test him,* they asked him to show them a sign from heaven. 2 So he answered and﻿* said to them, “When﻿* evening comes you say, ‘It will be fair weather because the sky is red,’ 3 and early in the morning, ‘Today it will be stormy weather, because the sky is red and﻿* darkening.’ You know how to evaluate correctly the appearance of the sky, but you are not able to evaluate﻿* the signs of the times. 4 An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, and a sign will not be given to it except the sign of Jonah!” And he left them and﻿* went away. 
Beware the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees
5 And when﻿* the disciples arrived at the other side, they had forgotten to take bread. 6 And Jesus said to them, “Watch out for and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees!” 7 So they were discussing this﻿* among themselves, saying, “It is because we did not take bread.” 8 But knowing this,* Jesus said, “Why are you discussing among yourselves that you did not take bread, you of little faith? 9 Do you not yet understand or do you not remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up? 10 Or the seven loaves for the four thousand and how many baskets you took up? 11 How do you not understand that I did not speak to you about bread? But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees!” 12 Then they understood that he did not say to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 
Peter’s Confession at Caesarea Philippi
13 Now when﻿* Jesus came to the region of Caesarea ⌊Philippi⌋, he began asking﻿* his disciples, saying, “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” 14 And they said, ⌊Some⌋ say John the Baptist, but others Elijah, and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” 15 He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” 16 And Simon Peter answered and﻿* said, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God!” 17 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to him, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah, because flesh and blood did not reveal this﻿* to you, but my Father who is in heaven. 18 And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not overpower it! 19 I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth will be released in heaven.” 20 Then he commanded the disciples that they should tell no one that he was the Christ. 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection
21 From that time on Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised on the third day. 22 And Peter took him aside and﻿* began to rebuke him, saying, ⌊God forbid⌋, Lord! This will never happen to you!” 23 But he turned around and﻿* said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a cause for stumbling to me, because you are not intent on the things of God, but the things of people!” 
Taking Up One’s Cross to Follow Jesus
24 Then Jesus said to his disciples, “If anyone wants to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. 25 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life on account of me will find it. 26 For what will a person be benefited if he gains the whole world but forfeits his life? Or what will a person give in exchange for his life? 27 For the Son of Man is going to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and at that time he will reward each one according to ⌊what he has done⌋. 28 Truly I say to you, that there are some of those standing here who will never experience death until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.” 
The Transfiguration
17 And after six days Jesus took along Peter and James and John his brother, and led them up on a high mountain by themselves. 2 And he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothing became bright as the light. 3 And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with him. 4 So Peter answered and﻿* said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good that we are here! If you want, I will make here three shelters, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.” 5 While﻿* he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and behold, a voice from the cloud said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased. Listen to him!” 6 And when﻿* the disciples heard this,* they fell down on their faces and were extremely frightened. 7 And Jesus came and touched them and﻿* said, “Get up and do not be afraid.” 8 And when they﻿* lifted up their eyes they saw no one except him—Jesus alone. 
9 And as﻿* they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them saying, “Tell no one the vision until the Son of Man is raised from the dead.” 10 And the disciples asked him, saying, “Then why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” 11 And he answered and﻿* said, “Elijah indeed is coming, and will restore all things. 12 But I say to you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him, but did with him whatever they wanted. In the same way also the Son of Man is going to suffer at their hands.” 13 Then the disciples understood that he had spoken to them about John the Baptist. 
A Demon-possessed Boy Healed
14 And when they﻿* came to the crowd, a man approached him, kneeling down before him 15 and saying, “Lord, have mercy on my son, because he has seizures and suffers severely, for often he falls into the fire and often into the water. 16 And I brought him to your disciples, and they were not able to heal him.” 17 And Jesus answered and﻿* said, “O unbelieving and perverse generation! ⌊How long⌋ will I be with you? ⌊How long⌋ must I put up with you? Bring him here to me!” 18 And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon came out of him and the boy was healed from that hour. 
19 Then the disciples approached Jesus privately and﻿* said, ⌊Why⌋ were we not able to expel it?” 20 And he said to them, “Because of your little faith. For truly I say to you, if you have faith like a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move, and nothing will be impossible for you.” 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection a Second Time
22 Now as﻿* they were gathering in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men, 23 and they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised.” And they were extremely distressed. 
Paying the Double Drachma Temple Tax
24 Now when﻿* they arrived in Capernaum, the ones who collected the double drachma tax came up to Peter and said, “Does your teacher not pay the double drachma tax?” 25 He said, “Yes.” And when he﻿* came into the house, Jesus spoke to him first, saying, “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth collect tolls or taxes—from their own sons, or from foreigners?” 26 And when he﻿* said, “From foreigners,” Jesus said to him, “Then the sons are free. 27 But so that we do not give offense to them, go out to the sea, cast a line with﻿* a hook, and take the first fish that comes up. And when you﻿* open its mouth, you will find a four-drachma coin. Take that and﻿* give it﻿* to them for me and you.” 
The Question About Who Is Greatest
18 At that time the disciples came up to Jesus, saying, “Who then is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” 2 And calling a child to himself, he had him stand in their midst 3 and said, “Truly I say to you, unless you turn around and become like young children, you will never enter into the kingdom of heaven! 4 Therefore whoever humbles himself like this child, this person is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, 5 and whoever welcomes one child such as this in my name welcomes me. 6 But whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him that ⌊a large millstone⌋ be hung on his neck and he be drowned in the depths of the sea. 7 Woe to the world because of causes for stumbling, for it is a necessity that causes for stumbling come; nevertheless, woe to the person through whom the cause for stumbling comes. 8 And if your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it﻿* from you! It is better for you to enter into life crippled or lame than, having two hands or two feet, to be thrown into the eternal fire! 9 And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it﻿* from you! It is better for you to enter into life one-eyed than, having two eyes, to be thrown into fiery hell! 
The Parable of the Lost Sheep
10 “See to it that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that their angels in heaven constantly see the face of my Father who is in heaven. 12 What do you think? If ⌊a certain man has⌋ a hundred sheep, and one of them wanders away, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go and﻿* look for the one that wandered away? 13 And if he happens to find it, truly I say to you that he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine that did not wander away. 14 In the same way it is not the will ⌊of⌋ your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones perish. 
Confronting a Brother Who Sins Against You
15 “Now if your brother sins against you, go correct him between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. 16 But if he does not listen, take with you in addition one or two others, so that by ⌊the testimony⌋ of two or three witnesses every matter may be established. 17 And if he refuses to listen to them, tell it﻿* to the church. But if he refuses to listen to the church also, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector. 
18 “Truly I say to you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth will be released in heaven. 19 Again, truly I say to you that if two of you agree on earth about any matter that they ask, it will be done for them from my Father who is in heaven. 20 For where two or three are gathered in my name, I am there in the midst of them.” 
The Parable of the Unforgiving Slave
21 Then Peter came up to him and﻿* said, “Lord, how many times will my brother sin against me and I will forgive him? Up to seven times?” 22 Jesus said to him, “I do not say to you up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven! 
23 “For this reason the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a man—a king—who wanted to settle accounts with his slaves. 24 And when﻿* he began to settle them,* someone was brought to him who owed ten thousand talents. 25 And because﻿* he did not have enough﻿* to repay it,* the master ordered him to be sold, and his﻿* wife and his﻿* children and everything that he had, and to be repaid. 26 Then the slave threw himself to the ground and﻿* began to do obeisance to him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay back everything to you!’ 27 So the master of that slave, because he﻿* had compassion, released him and forgave him the loan. 28 But that slave went out and﻿* found one of his fellow slaves who owed him a hundred denarii, and taking hold of him, he began to choke him,* saying, ‘Pay back everything that you owe!’ 29 Then his fellow slave threw himself to the ground and﻿* began to implore﻿* him, saying, ‘Be patient with me and I will repay you!’ 30 But he did not want to, but rather he went and﻿* threw him into prison until he would repay what was owed. 31 So when﻿* his fellow slaves saw what had happened, they were extremely distressed, and went and﻿* reported to their master everything that had happened. 32 Then his master summoned him and﻿* said to him, ‘Wicked slave! I forgave you all that debt because you implored me! 33 Should you not also have shown mercy to your fellow slave as I also showed mercy to you?’ 34 And because he﻿* was angry, his master handed him over to the merciless jailers until he would repay everything that was owed. 35 So also my heavenly Father will do to you, unless each of you forgives his brother from your hearts!” 
On Divorce
19 And it happened that when Jesus had finished these statements, he went away from Galilee and came into the region of Judea on the other side of the Jordan. 2 And large crowds followed him, and he healed them there. 3 And Pharisees came up to him in order to﻿* test him, and asked﻿* if it was permitted for a man to divorce his wife for any cause. 4 And he answered and﻿* said, “Have you not read that the one who created them﻿* from the beginning made them male and female 5 and said, ‘On account of this a man will leave his﻿* father and his﻿* mother and will be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’? 6 So then, they are no longer two but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, man must not separate.” 7 They said to him, “Why then did Moses command us﻿* to give a document—a certificate of divorce—and to divorce her?” 8 He said to them, “Moses, with reference to your hardness of heart, permitted you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not like this. 9 Now I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except on the basis of sexual immorality, and marries another commits adultery, and whoever marries her who is divorced commits adultery.” 
10 The disciples said to him, “If this is the case of a man with his﻿* wife, it would be better not to marry!” 11 But he said to them, “Not everyone can accept this saying but those to whom it has been given. 12 For there are eunuchs who were born as such from their mother’s womb, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by people, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who is able to accept this,* let him accept it.”* 
Little Children Brought to Jesus
13 Then children were brought to him so that he could lay his hands on them and pray, but the disciples rebuked them. 14 But Jesus said, “Allow the children, and do not forbid them to come to me, ⌊for to such belongs⌋ the kingdom of heaven.” 15 And he laid his﻿* hands on them and﻿* traveled on from there. 
A Rich Young Man
16 And behold, someone came up to him and﻿* said, “Teacher, what good thing must I do so that I will have eternal life?” 17 And he said to him, “Why are you asking me about what is good? There is one who is good. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments!” 18 He said to him, “Which ones?” And Jesus said, “Do not commit murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony, 19 honor your﻿* father and your﻿* mother, and love your neighbor as yourself.” 20 The young man said to him, “All these I have observed. What do I still lack?” 21 Jesus said to him, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give the proceeds﻿* to the poor—and you will have treasure in heaven—and come, follow me.” 22 But when﻿* the young man heard the statement, he went away sorrowful, because he was one who had many possessions. 
23 And Jesus said to his disciples, “Truly I say to you that with difficulty a rich person will enter into the kingdom of heaven! 24 And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than a rich person into the kingdom of God.” 25 So when﻿* the disciples heard this,* they were extremely amazed, saying, “Then who can be saved?” 26 But Jesus looked at them﻿* and﻿* said to them, “With human beings this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.” 27 Then Peter answered and﻿* said to him, “Behold, we have left everything and followed you. What then will there be for us?” 28 And Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you that in the renewal of the world, when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me—you also will sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 29 And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields on account of my name will receive a hundred times as much, and will inherit eternal life. 30 But many who are first will be last, and the last first. 
The Parable of the Workers in the Vineyard
20 “For the kingdom of heaven is like a man—the master of the house—who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard. 2 And after﻿* coming to an agreement with the workers for a denarius per day, he sent them into his vineyard. 3 And going out about the third hour, he saw others standing idle in the marketplace. 4 And to those people he said, ‘You also go into the vineyard, and I will give you whatever is right.’ 5 So they went. Going out again about the sixth and ninth hour he did the same thing. 6 And about the eleventh hour he went out and﻿* found others standing there and said to them, ‘Why are you standing here the whole day unemployed?’ 7 They said to him, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go also into the vineyard.’ 8 And when﻿* evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning from the last up to the first.’ 9 And when the ones hired about the eleventh hour came, they received a denarius apiece. 10 And when﻿* the first came, they thought that they would receive more, and they also received a denarius apiece. 11 And when they﻿* received it,* they began to complain against the master of the house, 12 saying, ‘These last people worked one hour and you made them equal to us who have endured the burden of the day and the burning heat!’ 13 But he answered one of them and﻿* said, ‘Friend, I am not doing you wrong. Did you not come to an agreement with me for a denarius? 14 Take what is yours and go! But I want to give to this last person the same as I gave to you also. 15 Is it not permitted for me to do whatever I want with what is mine? Or is your eye evil because I am generous?’ 16 Thus the last will be first and the first last.” 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection a Third Time
17 And as﻿* Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples by themselves and said to them on the way, 18 “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death, 19 and will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock him﻿* and flog him﻿* and crucify him,* and on the third day he will be raised.” 
A Request by the Mother of James and John
20 Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came up to him with her sons, and﻿* kneeling down she asked﻿* something from him. 21 And he said to her, “What do you want?” She said to him, “Say that these two sons of mine may sit one at your right hand and one at your left in your kingdom.” 22 But Jesus answered and﻿* said, “You do not know what you are asking! Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink?” They said to him, “We are able.” 23 He said to them, “You will indeed drink my cup, but to sit at my right hand and at my left is not mine to grant, but is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.” 
24 And when﻿* the ten heard this,* they were indignant concerning the two brothers. 25 But Jesus called them to himself and﻿* said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those in high positions exercise authority over them. 26 It will not be like this among you! But whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, 27 and whoever wants to be most prominent among you must be your slave—28 just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.” 
Two Blind Men Healed at Jericho
29 And as﻿* they were going out of Jericho, a large crowd followed him. 30 And behold, there were two blind men sitting beside the road. When they﻿* heard that Jesus was passing by, they called out, saying, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!” 31 And the crowd rebuked them so that they would be quiet. But they called out all the more, saying, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!” 32 And Jesus stopped,* called them, and said, “What do you want me to do for you?” 33 They said to him, “Lord, that our eyes be opened!” 34 And having compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately they received their sight and followed him. 
The Triumphal Entry
21 And when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage at the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, 2 saying to them, “Go into the village before you, and right away you will find a donkey tied and a colt with her. Untie them﻿* and﻿* bring them﻿* to me. 3 And if anyone says anything to you, you will say, ‘The Lord ⌊needs them⌋,’ and he will send them at once.” 4 Now this took place so that what was spoken through the prophet would be fulfilled, saying, 
5 “Say to the daughter of Zion, 
‘Behold, your king is coming to you, 
humble and mounted on a donkey, 
and on a colt, the foal of a pack animal.’ ” 
6 So the disciples went﻿* and did﻿* just as Jesus directed them, 7 and﻿* brought the donkey and the colt and put their﻿* cloaks on them, and he sat on them. 8 And a very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, and others were cutting branches from the trees and spreading them﻿* on the road. 9 And the crowds who went ahead of him and the ones who followed were shouting, saying, 
“Hosanna to the Son of David! 
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord! 
Hosanna in the highest heaven!”* 
10 And when﻿* he entered into Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred up, saying, “Who is this?” 11 And the crowds were saying, “This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth of Galilee!” 
The Cleansing of the Temple
12 And Jesus entered the temple courts﻿* and drove out all those who were selling and buying in the temple, and overturned the tables of the money changers and the chairs of those who were selling doves. 13 And he said to them, “It is written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a cave of robbers!” 
14 And the blind and the lame came up to him in the temple courts﻿* and he healed them. 15 But when﻿* the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children shouting in the temple courts﻿* and saying, “Hosanna to the Son of David!” they were indignant. 16 And they said to him, “Do you hear what these children﻿* are saying?” So Jesus said to them, “Yes, have you never read, ‘Out of the mouths of children and nursing babies you have prepared for yourself praise’?” 17 And leaving them, he went outside of the city to Bethany and spent the night there. 
A Barren Fig Tree Cursed
18 Now early in the morning, as he﻿* was returning to the city, he was hungry. 19 And seeing a single fig tree by the road, he went to it and found nothing on it except leaves only. And he said to it, “May there be no more fruit from you ⌊forever⌋, and the fig tree withered at once. 20 And when they﻿* saw it,* the disciples were astonished, saying, “How did the fig tree wither at once?” 21 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, you will do not only what was done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,” it will happen! 22 And whatever you ask in prayer, if you﻿* believe, you will receive.” 
Jesus’ Authority Challenged
23 And after﻿* he arrived at the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him while he﻿* was teaching, saying, “By what authority are you doing these things? And who gave you this authority?” 24 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “I also will ask you one question. If you tell the answer﻿* to me, I also will tell you by what authority I am doing these things. 25 From where was the baptism of John—from heaven or from men?” And they began to discuss﻿* this﻿* among themselves, saying, “If we say ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 26 But if we say, ‘From men,’ we are afraid of the crowd, because they all look upon John as a prophet.” 27 And they answered and﻿* said to Jesus, “We do not know.” And he said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things. 
The Parable of the Two Sons
28 “Now what do you think? A man had two sons. He approached the first and﻿* said, ‘Son, go work in the vineyard today.’ 29 And he answered and﻿* said, ‘I do not want to!’ But later he changed his mind and﻿* went. 30 And he approached the second and﻿* said the same thing. So he answered and﻿* said, ‘I will, sir,’ and he did not go. 31 Which of the two did the will of his father?” They said, “The first.” Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are going ahead of you into the kingdom of God! 32 For John came to you in the way of righteousness and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did believe him. And when﻿* you saw it,* you did not even change your minds later so as to believe in him. 
The Parable of the Tenant Farmers in the Vineyard
33 “Listen to another parable: There was a man—a master of a house—who planted a vineyard, and put a fence around it, and dug a winepress in it, and built a watchtower, and leased it to tenant farmers, and went on a journey. 34 And when the season of fruit drew near, he sent his slaves to the tenant farmers to collect his fruit. 35 And the tenant farmers seized his slaves, one of whom they beat, and one of whom they killed, and one of whom they stoned. 36 Again, he sent other slaves, more than the first ones, and they did the same thing to them. 37 So finally he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ 38 But when﻿* the tenant farmers saw the son, they said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and have his inheritance!’ 39 And they seized him and﻿* threw him﻿* out of the vineyard and killed him.* 40 Now when the master of the vineyard arrives, what will he do to those tenant farmers?” 41 They said to him, “He will destroy those evil men completely and lease the vineyard to other tenant farmers who will give him the fruits in their season.” 42 Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the scriptures, 
‘The stone which the builders rejected, 
this has become ⌊the cornerstone⌋. 
This came about from the Lord, 
and it is marvelous in our eyes’? 
43 For this reason, I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and will be given to a people who produce its fruits. 44 And the one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, and the one on whom it falls—it will crush him!” 45 And when﻿* the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they knew that he was speaking about them, 46 and although they﻿* wanted to arrest him, they were afraid of the crowds, because they looked upon him as a prophet. 
The Parable of the Wedding Celebration
22 And continuing, Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying, 2 “The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a man—a king—who gave a wedding celebration for his son. 3 And he sent his slaves to summon those who had been invited to the wedding celebration, and they did not want to come. 4 Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those who have been invited, “Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and fattened cattle have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding celebration!” ’ 5 But they paid no attention and﻿* went away—this one to his own field, that one to his business. 6 And the others, seizing his slaves, mistreated them﻿* and killed them.* 7 And the king was angry and sent his troops and﻿* destroyed those murderers and burned their city. 8 Then he said to his slaves, ‘The wedding celebration is ready, but those who had been invited were not worthy. 9 Therefore, go out to the places where the roads exit the city and invite to the wedding celebration as many people as you find.’ 10 And those slaves went out into the roads and﻿* gathered everyone whom they found, both evil and good, and the wedding celebration was filled ⌊with dinner guests⌋. 11 But when﻿* the king came in to see the ⌊dinner guests⌋, he saw a man there not dressed in wedding clothes. 12 And he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you come in here, not having wedding clothes?’ But ⌊he could say nothing⌋. 13 Then the king said to the servants, ‘Tie him up ⌊hand and foot⌋ and﻿* throw him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth!’ 14 For many are called but few are chosen.” 
Paying Taxes to Caesar
15 Then the Pharisees went ⌊and consulted⌋ so that they could entrap him with a statement. 16 And they sent their disciples to him with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and ⌊you do not care what anyone thinks⌋, ⌊because you do not regard the opinion of people⌋. 17 Therefore tell us what you think. Is it permitted to pay taxes to Caesar or not?” 18 But because he﻿* knew their maliciousness, Jesus said, “Hypocrites! Why are you testing me? 19 Show me the coin for the tax!” So they brought him a denarius. 20 And he said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?” 21 They said to him, “Caesar’s.” Then he said to them, “Therefore give to Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God!” 22 And when they﻿* heard this,* they were astonished, and they left him and﻿* went away. 
A Question About Marriage and the Resurrection
23 On that day Sadducees—who say there is no resurrection—came up to him and asked him, 24 saying, “Teacher, Moses said if someone dies without having children, his brother is to marry his wife and ⌊father⌋ descendants for his brother. 25 Now there were seven brothers with us. And the first died after﻿* getting married, and because he﻿* did not have descendants, he left his wife to his brother. 26 So also the second and the third, up to the seventh. 27 And last of all the woman died. 28 In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife of the seven will she be? For they all had her as wife.”* 29 But Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “You are mistaken, because﻿* you do not know the scriptures or the power of God! 30 For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels of God in heaven. 31 Now concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, who said, 32 “I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob”? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living!” 33 And when﻿* the crowds heard this,* they were amazed at his teaching. 
The Greatest Commandment
34 Now when﻿* the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they assembled at the same place. 35 And one of them, a legal expert, put a question to him﻿* to test him: 36 “Teacher, which commandment is greatest in the law?” 37 And he said to him, “ ‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’ 38 This is the greatest and first commandment. 39 And the second is like it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ 40 On these two commandments depend all the law and the prophets.” 
David’s Son and Lord
41 Now while﻿* the Pharisees were assembled, Jesus asked them, 42 saying, “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him, “David’s.” 43 He said to them, “How then does David, by the Spirit, call him ‘Lord,’ saying, 
44 ‘The Lord said to my Lord, 
“Sit at my right hand 
until I put your enemies 
under your feet” ’? 
45 If then David calls him ‘Lord,’ how is he his son?” 46 And no one was able to answer him a word, nor did anyone dare from that day on to ask him any more questions.* 
Seven Woes Pronounced on the Scribes and Pharisees
23 Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, 2 saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees sit on the seat of Moses. 3 Therefore do and observe everything that they tell you, but do not do as ⌊they do⌋, for they tell others to do something﻿* and do not do it themselves.* 4 And they tie up heavy burdens and put them﻿* on people’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing with their finger to move them. 5 And they do all their deeds in order to be seen by people, for they make their phylacteries broad and make their tassels long. 6 And they love the place of honor at banquets and the best seats in the synagogues 7 and the greetings in the marketplaces and to be called ‘Rabbi’ by people. 8 But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ because one is your teacher, and you are all brothers, 9 And do not call anyone﻿* your father on earth, for one is your heavenly Father. 10 And do not be called teachers, because one is your teacher, the Christ. 11 And the greatest among you will be your servant. 12 And whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted. 
13 “But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites!—because you shut the kingdom of heaven before people! For you do not enter, nor permit those wanting to go in﻿* to enter. 
15 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites!—because you travel around the sea and the dry land to make one convert, and when he becomes one,* you make him twice as much a son of hell as you are! 
16 “Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing! But whoever swears by the gold of the temple is bound by his oath.’ 17 Fools and blind people! For which is greater, the gold or the temple that makes the gold holy? 18 And, ‘Whoever swears by the altar, it is nothing! But whoever swears by the gift that is on it is bound by his oath.’ 19 Blind people! For which is greater, the gift or the altar that makes the gift holy? 20 Therefore the one who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything that is on it. 21 And the one who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it. 22 And the one who swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by the one who sits on it. 
23 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites!—because you pay a tenth of mint and dill and cumin, and neglect the more important matters of the law—justice and mercy and faithfulness! It was necessary to do these things ⌊while not neglecting those⌋. 24 Blind guides who filter out a gnat and swallow a camel! 
25 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites!—because you cleanse the outside of the cup and the dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence! 26 Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and the dish, so that the outside of it may become clean also. 
27 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites!—because you are like whitewashed tombs which on the outside appear beautiful, but on the inside are full of the bones of the dead and of everything unclean! 28 In the same way, on the outside you also appear righteous to people, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness. 
29 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites!—because you build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous, 30 and you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partners with them in the blood of the prophets!’ 31 Thus you testify against yourselves that you are descendants of those who murdered the prophets! 32 And you—fill up the measure of your fathers! 33 Serpents! Offspring of vipers! How will you escape from the condemnation to hell? 34 For this reason, behold, I am sending to you prophets and wise men and scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify, and some of them you will flog in your synagogues and will pursue from town to town, 35 so that upon you will come all the righteous blood shed on the earth from the blood of righteous Abel up to the blood of Zechariah son of Barachiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar. 36 Truly I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation! 
The Lament over Jerusalem
37 “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How many times I wanted to gather your children together ⌊the way⌋ a hen gathers her young together under her﻿* wings, and you were not willing! 38 Behold, your house has been left to you desolate! 39 For I tell you, you will never see me from now on until you say, 
‘Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!’ ” 
The Destruction of the Temple Predicted
24 And as Jesus went out of the temple courts﻿* he was going along, and his disciples came up to point out to him the buildings of the temple. 2 But he answered and﻿* said to them, “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, not one stone will be left here on another stone that will not be thrown down!” 
Signs of the End of the Age
3 And as﻿* he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came up to him privately, saying, “Tell us, when will these things happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?” 4 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Watch out that no one deceives you! 5 For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will deceive many. 6 And you are going to hear about wars and rumors of wars. See to it that you are not alarmed, for this must happen, but the end is not yet. 7 For nation will rise up against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places. 8 But all these things are the beginning of birth pains. 
Persecution of Disciples Predicted
9 “Then they will hand you over to persecution and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations because of my name. 10 And then many will be led into sin and will betray one another and will hate one another, 11 and many false prophets will appear and will deceive many, 12 and because lawlessness will increase, the love of many will grow cold. 13 But the one who endures to the end—this person will be saved. 14 And this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed in the whole inhabited earth for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come. 
The Abomination of Desolation
15 “So when you see the abomination of desolation spoken about by the prophet Daniel standing in the holy place” (let the one who reads understand), 16 “then those in Judea must flee to the mountains! 17 The one who is on his﻿* housetop must not come down to take things out of his house, 18 and the one who is in the field must not turn back to pick up his cloak. 19 And woe to those ⌊who are pregnant⌋ and to those who are nursing their babies﻿* in those days! 20 But pray that your flight may not happen in winter or on a Sabbath. 21 For at that time there will be great tribulation, such as has not happened from the beginning of the world until now, nor ever will happen. 22 And unless those days had been shortened, ⌊no human being would be saved⌋. But for the sake of the elect, those days will be shortened. 
23 “At that time if anyone should say to you, ‘Behold, here is the Christ,’ or ‘Here he is,’ do not believe him!* 24 For false messiahs and false prophets will appear, and will produce great signs and wonders in order to deceive, if possible, even the elect. 25 Behold, I have told you ahead of time! 26 Therefore if they say to you, ‘Behold, he is in the wilderness,’ do not go out, or﻿* ‘Behold, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it!* 27 For just as the lightning comes from the east and flashes to the west, so the coming of the Son of Man will be. 28 Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather. 
The Arrival of the Son of Man
29 “And immediately after the tribulation of those days, 
‘the sun will be darkened 
and the moon will not give its light, 
and the stars will fall from heaven, 
and the powers of heaven will be shaken.’ 
30 And then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man arriving on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. 31 And he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect together from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other end of it. 
The Parable of the Fig Tree
32 “Now learn the parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch has already become tender and puts forth its﻿* leaves, you know that summer is near. 33 So also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near, at the door. 34 Truly I say to you that this generation will never pass away until all these things take place! 35 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away. 
The Unknown Day and Hour
36 “But concerning that day and hour no one knows—not even the angels of heaven nor the Son—except the Father alone. 37 For just as the days of Noah were, so the coming of the Son of Man will be. 38 For as in the days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day Noah entered into the ark. 39 And they did not know anything﻿* until the deluge came and swept them﻿* all away. So also the coming of the Son of Man will be. 40 Then there will be two men in the field; one will be taken and one left. 41 Two women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken and one left. 42 Therefore be on the alert, because you do not know what day your Lord is coming! 43 But understand this: that if the master of the house had known what watch of the night the thief was coming, he would have stayed awake and would not have let his house be broken into. 44 For this reason you also must be ready, because the Son of Man is coming at an hour that you do not think he will come.* 
A Faithful Slave and an Unfaithful Slave
45 “Who then is the faithful and wise slave whom the master has put in charge of his household slaves to give them their﻿* food at the right time? 46 Blessed is that slave whom his master will find so doing when he﻿* comes back. 47 Truly I say to you that he will put him in charge of all his possessions. 48 But if that evil slave should say ⌊to himself⌋, ‘My master is staying away for a long time,’ 49 and he begins to beat his fellow slaves and eats and drinks with drunkards, 50 the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and at an hour that he does not know, 51 and will cut him in two and assign his place with the hypocrites. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth! 
The Parable of the Ten Virgins
25 “Then the kingdom of heaven may be compared to ten virgins who took their lamps and﻿* went out to meet the bridegroom. 2 Now five of them were foolish and five were wise. 3 For when﻿* the foolish ones took their lamps, they did not take olive oil with them. 4 But the wise ones took olive oil in flasks with their lamps. 5 And when﻿* the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. 6 But in the middle of the night there was a shout, ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’ 7 Then all those virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps. 8 And the foolish ones said to the wise ones, ‘Give us some of your olive oil, because our lamps are going out!’ 9 But the wise ones answered saying, “Certainly there will never be enough for us and for you! Go instead to those who sell olive oil﻿* and buy some﻿* for yourselves.’ 10 But while﻿* they had gone away to buy it﻿* the bridegroom arrived, and those who were ready went inside with him to the wedding celebration, and the door was shut. 11 And later the other virgins came also, saying, ‘Lord, lord, open the door﻿* for us!’ 12 But he answered and﻿* said, ‘Truly I say to you, I do not know you!’ 13 Therefore be on the alert, because you do not know the day or the hour! 
The Parable of the Talents
14 For it is like a man going on a journey. He summoned his own slaves and handed over his property to them. 15 And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to another one, to each one according to his own ability, and he went on a journey immediately. 16 The one who had received the five talents went out and﻿* traded with them and gained five more. 17 In the same way the one who had the two gained two more. 18 But the one who had received the one went away and﻿* dug up the ground and hid his master’s money. 19 Now after a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. 20 And the one who had received the five talents came up and﻿* brought five more talents, saying, ‘Master, you handed over to me five talents. See, I have gained five more talents!’ 21 His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things; I will put you in charge over many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’ 22 And the one who had the two talents also came up and﻿* said, ‘Master, you handed over to me two talents. See, I have gained two talents more!’ 23 His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things; I will put you in charge over many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’ 24 And the one who had received the one talent came up also and﻿* said, ‘Master, because I﻿* knew you, that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering from where you did not scatter seed.* 25 And because I﻿* was afraid, I went away and﻿* hid your talent in the ground. See, you have what is yours!’ 26 But his master answered and﻿* said to him, ‘Evil and lazy slave! You knew that I reap where I did not sow and gather from where I did not scatter seed.* 27 Then you ought to have deposited my money with the bankers, and when I﻿* returned I would have gotten back what was mine with interest! 28 Therefore take the talent from him and give it﻿* to the one who has the ten talents. 29 For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. 30 And throw the worthless slave into the outer darkness—in that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth!’ 
The Judgment of the Sheep and the Goats
31 Now when the Son of Man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. 32 And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate them from one another like a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. 33 And he will place the sheep on his right and the goats on the left. 34 Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world! 35 For I was hungry and you gave me something﻿* to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something﻿* to drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me as a guest, 36 I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you cared for me, I was in prison and you came to me.’ 37 Then the righteous will answer him, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you,* or thirsty and give you something﻿* to drink? 38 And when did we see you a stranger and welcome you﻿* as a guest, or naked and clothe you?* 39 And when did we see you sick or in prison and come to you?’ 40 And the king will answer and﻿* say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, in as much as you did it﻿* to one of the least of these brothers of mine, you did it﻿* to me.’ 41 Then he will also say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you accursed ones, into the eternal fire that has been prepared for the devil and his angels! 42 For I was hungry and you did not give me anything﻿* to eat, I was thirsty and you did not give me anything﻿* to drink, 43 I was a stranger and you did not welcome me as a guest, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not care for me.’ 44 Then they will also answer, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and not serve you?’ 45 Then he will answer them, saying, ‘Truly I say to you, in as much as you did not do it﻿* to one of the least of these, you did not do it﻿* to me.’ 46 And these will depart into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.” 
The Chief Priests and Elders Plot to Kill Jesus
26 And it happened that when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said to his disciples, 2 “You know that after two days the Passover takes place, and the Son of Man will be handed over in order to be crucified.” 
3 Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, who was named Caiaphas, 4 and plotted in order that they could arrest Jesus by stealth and kill him.* 5 But they were saying, “Not during the feast, so that there will not be an uproar among the people.” 
Jesus’ Anointing at Bethany
6 Now while﻿* Jesus was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, 7 a woman came up to him holding an alabaster flask of very expensive perfumed oil, and poured it﻿* out on his head while he﻿* was reclining at table. 8 And when﻿* the disciples saw it﻿* they were indignant, saying, “⌊Why⌋ this waste? 9 For this could have been sold for a large sum and given to the poor!” 10 But Jesus, knowing this,* said to them, “Why do you cause trouble for the woman? For she has done a good deed for me. 11 For the poor you always have with you, but you do not always have me. 12 For when﻿* this woman poured this ointment on my body, she did it﻿* in order to prepare me for burial. 13 Truly I say to you, wherever this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be told in memory of her.” 
Judas Arranges to Betray Jesus
14 Then one of the twelve, the one named Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests 15 and﻿* said, “What are you willing to give me if I in turn deliver him to you?” So they set out for him thirty silver coins. 16 And from that time on, he began seeking a favorable opportunity in order that he could betray him. 
Jesus’ Final Passover with the Disciples
17 Now on the first day﻿* of the feast of Unleavened Bread the disciples came up to Jesus, saying, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?” 18 And he said, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is near. I am celebrating the Passover with you with my disciples.” ’ 19 And the disciples did as Jesus directed them, and they prepared the Passover. 20 And when it﻿* was evening, he was reclining at table with the twelve disciples. 21 And while﻿* they were eating he said, “Truly I say to you, that one of you will betray me.” 22 And greatly distressed, each one began to say to him, “⌊Surely I am not he, am I⌋, Lord?” 23 And he answered and﻿* said, “The one who dips his hand in the bowl with me—this one will betray me. 24 The Son of Man is going just as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for him if that man had not been born.” 25 And Judas, the one who was betraying him, answered and﻿* said, “⌊Surely I am not he, am I⌋, Rabbi?” He said to him, “You have said it.”* 
The Lord’s Supper
26 Now while﻿* they were eating Jesus took bread and, after﻿* giving thanks, he broke it,* and giving it﻿* to the disciples, he said, “Take, eat, this is my body.” 27 And after﻿* taking the cup and giving thanks he gave it﻿* to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you, 28 for this is my blood of the covenant which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. 29 But I tell you, from now on I will never drink of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father.” 30 And after they﻿* had sung the hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. 
Jesus Predicts Peter’s Denial
31 Then Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away because of me during this night, for it is written, 
‘I will strike the shepherd 
and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’ 
32 But after I am raised, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.” 33 But Peter answered and﻿* said to him, “If they all fall away because of you, I will never fall away!” 34 Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to you that during this night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times!” 35 Peter said to him, “Even if it is necessary for me to die with you, I will never deny you!” And all the disciples said the same thing. 
The Prayer in Gethsemane
36 Then Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to the disciples, “Sit here while I go over there and﻿* pray.” 37 And taking along Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be distressed and troubled. 38 Then he said to them, “My soul is deeply grieved, to the point of death. Remain here and stay awake with me.” 39 And going forward a little he fell down on his face, praying and saying, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as you will.”* 40 And he came to the disciples and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter, “So, were you not able to stay awake with me one hour? 41 Stay awake and pray that you will not enter into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak!” 42 Again for the second time he went away and﻿* prayed, saying, “My Father, if this cannot pass unless I drink it, your will must be done.” 43 And he came again and﻿* found them sleeping, ⌊for they could not keep their eyes open⌋. 44 And leaving them again, he went away and﻿* prayed for the third time, saying the same thing again. 45 Then he came to the disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Behold, the hour is near, and the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of sinners. 46 Get up, let us go! Behold, the one who is betraying me is approaching!” 
The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus
47 And while﻿* he was still speaking, behold, Judas—one of the twelve—arrived, and with him a large crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and elders of the people. 48 Now the one who was betraying him had given them a sign, saying, “The one whom I kiss—he is the one.* Arrest him!” 49 And he came up to Jesus immediately and﻿* said, “Greetings, Rabbi,” and kissed him. 50 And Jesus said to him, “Friend, do that﻿* for which you have come.” Then they came up and﻿* laid hands on Jesus and arrested him. 
51 And behold, one of those with Jesus extended his﻿* hand and﻿* drew his sword, and striking the slave of the high priest, cut off his ear. 52 Then Jesus said to him, “Put your sword back into its place! For all who take up the sword will die by the sword. 53 Or do you think that I cannot call upon my Father, and he would put at my disposal at once more than twelve legions of angels? 54 How then would the scriptures be fulfilled that it must happen in this way?” 
55 At that time Jesus said to the crowds, “Have you come out with swords and clubs, as against a robber, to arrest me? Every day in the temple courts﻿* I sat teaching, and you did not arrest me! 56 But all this has happened in order that the scriptures of the prophets would be fulfilled.” Then the disciples all abandoned him and﻿* fled. 
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin
57 Now those who had arrested Jesus led him﻿* away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders had gathered. 58 But Peter was following him from a distance, as far as the courtyard of the high priest. And he went inside and﻿* was sitting with the officers to see the outcome. 59 Now the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false testimony against Jesus in order that they could put him to death. 60 And they did not find it,* although﻿* many false witnesses came forward. And finally two came forward 61 and﻿* said, “This man said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it﻿* within three days.’ ” 62 And the high priest stood up and﻿* said to him, “Do you reply nothing? What are these people testifying against you?” 63 But Jesus was silent. And the high priest said to him, “I put you under oath by the living God, that you tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God!” 64 Jesus said to him, “You have said it.* But I tell you, from now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.” 65 Then the high priest tore his robes, saying, “He has blasphemed! What further need do we have of witnesses? Behold, you have just now heard the blasphemy! 66 What do you think?” And they answered and﻿* said, “⌊He deserves death⌋!” 67 Then they spat in his face and struck him with their fists, and they slapped him,* 68 saying, “Prophesy for us, you Christ! Who is it who hit you?” 
Peter Denies Jesus Three Times
69 Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard, and a female slave came up to him and﻿* said, “You also were with Jesus the Galilean.” 70 But he denied it﻿* in the presence of them all, saying, “I do not know what you mean!” 71 And when he﻿* went out to the gateway, another female slave saw him and said to those who were there, “This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.” 72 And again he denied it﻿* with an oath, “I do not know the man!” 73 And after a little while those who were standing there came up and﻿* said to Peter, “You really are one of them also, because even your accent ⌊reveals who you are⌋.” 74 Then he began to curse and to swear with an oath, “I do not know the man!” And immediately a rooster crowed. 75 And Peter remembered the statement Jesus had said, “Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times,” and he went outside and﻿* wept bitterly. 
Jesus Taken to Pilate
27 Now when it﻿* was early morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus in order to put him to death. 2 And after﻿* tying him up, they led him﻿* away and handed him﻿* over to Pilate the governor. 
The Suicide of Judas Iscariot
3 Then when﻿* Judas, the one who had betrayed him, saw that he had been condemned, he regretted what he had done﻿* and﻿* returned the thirty silver coins to the chief priests and elders, 4 saying, “I have sinned by﻿* betraying innocent blood!” But they said, “What is that to us? You see to it!”* 5 And throwing the silver coins into the temple he departed. And he went away and﻿* hanged himself. 6 But the chief priests took the silver coins and﻿* said, “It is not permitted to put them into the temple treasury, because it is ⌊blood money⌋.” 7 And after﻿* taking counsel, they purchased ⌊with⌋ them the Potter’s Field, for a burial place for strangers. 8 (For this reason that field has been called the Field of Blood until today.) 9 Then what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled, who said, “And they took the thirty silver coins, the price of the one who had been priced, on whom a price had been set by the sons of Israel, 10 and they gave them for the potter’s field, just as the Lord directed me.” 
Jesus Before Pilate
11 So Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, saying, “Are you the king of the Jews?” And Jesus said, “You say so.” 12 And ⌊when he was being accused⌋ by the chief priests and elders he answered nothing. 13 Then Pilate said to him, “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?” 14 And he did not reply to him, not even with reference to one statement, so that the governor was very astonished. 
Pilate Releases Barabbas
15 Now at each feast, the governor was accustomed to release one prisoner to the crowd—the one whom they wanted. 16 And at that time they had a notorious prisoner named Jesus Barabbas. 17 So after﻿* they had assembled, Pilate said to them, “Whom do you want me to release for you—Jesus Barabbas or Jesus who is called Christ?” 18 (For he knew that they had handed him over because of envy. 19 And while﻿* he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent a message﻿* to him, saying, “⌊Have nothing to do with that righteous man⌋, for I have suffered much as a result of a dream today because of him.”) 20 But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds that they should ask for Barabbas and put Jesus to death. 21 So the governor answered and﻿* said to them, “Which of the two do you want me to release for you?” And they said, “Barabbas!” 22 Pilate said to them, “What then should I do with Jesus, the one who is called Christ?” They all said, “Let him be crucified!” 23 And he said, “Why? What wrong has he done?” But they began to shout﻿* even louder, saying, “Let him be crucified!” 
24 So Pilate, when he﻿* saw that he was accomplishing nothing, but instead an uproar was developing, took water and﻿* washed his hands before the crowd, saying, “I am innocent of the blood of this man. You see to it!”* 25 And all the people answered and﻿* said, “His blood be on us and on our children!” 26 Then he released Barabbas for them, but after﻿* he had Jesus flogged, he handed him﻿* over so that he could be crucified. 
Jesus Is Mocked
27 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the governor’s residence and﻿* gathered the whole cohort to him. 28 And they stripped him and﻿* put a scarlet military cloak around him, 29 and weaving a crown of thorns, they put it﻿* on his head, and put a reed in his right hand. And kneeling down before him, they mocked him, saying, “Hail, king of the Jews!” 30 And they spat on him and﻿* took the reed and repeatedly struck him﻿* on his head. 31 And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of the military cloak and put his own clothes on him, and led him away in order to crucify him.* 
Jesus Is Crucified
32 And as they﻿* were going out, they found a man of Cyrene ⌊named⌋ Simon. They forced this man to carry his cross. 33 And when they﻿* came to a place called Golgotha (which ⌊means Place of a Skull⌋), 34 they gave him wine mixed with gall to drink, and when he﻿* tasted it﻿* he did not want to drink it.* 35 And when they﻿* had crucified him, they divided his clothes among themselves﻿* by﻿* casting lots. 36 And they sat down and﻿* were watching over him there. 37 And they put above his head the charge against him ⌊in writing⌋: “This is Jesus, the king of the Jews.” 38 Then two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left. 39 And those who passed by reviled him, shaking their heads 40 and saying, “The one who would destroy the temple and rebuild it﻿* in three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!” 41 In the same way also the chief priests, along with the scribes and elders, were mocking him,* saying, 42 “He saved others; he is not able to save himself! He is the king of Israel! Let him come down now from the cross, and we will believe in him! 43 He trusts in God; let him deliver him now if he wants to, because he said, ‘I am the Son of God’!” 44 And in the same way even the robbers who were crucified with him were reviling him. 
Jesus Dies on the Cross
45 Now from the sixth hour, darkness came over all the land until the ninth hour. 46 And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” (that is, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”) 47 And some of those who were standing there, when they﻿* heard it,* said, “This man is summoning Elijah!” 48 And immediately one of them ran and took a sponge and filled it﻿* with sour wine and put it﻿* on a reed and﻿* gave it﻿* to him to drink. 49 But the others said, “Leave him﻿* alone! let us see if Elijah is coming to save him.” 50 And Jesus cried out again with a loud voice and﻿* gave up his﻿* spirit. 51 And behold, the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom, and the earth shook and the rocks were split. 52 And the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised, 53 and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, they went into the holy city and appeared to many. 
54 Now the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus, when they﻿* saw the earthquake and the things that took place, were extremely frightened, saying, “Truly this man was God’s Son!” 55 And there were many women there, observing from a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him, 56 among whom were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. 
Jesus Is Buried
57 Now when it was evening, a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph came, who also was a disciple of Jesus himself. 58 This man approached Pilate and﻿* asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate ordered it﻿* to be given to him.* 59 And Joseph took the body and﻿* wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, 60 and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut in the rock. And he rolled a large stone to the entrance of the tomb and﻿* went away. 61 Now Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the tomb. 
The Tomb Is Sealed and Guarded
62 Now on the next day, which is after the day of preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees assembled before Pilate, 63 saying, “Sir, we remember that while﻿* that deceiver was still alive he said, ‘After three days I will rise.’ 64 Therefore give orders that the tomb be made secure until the third day, lest his disciples come and﻿* steal him and tell the people, ‘He has been raised from the dead,’ and the last deception will be worse than the first.” 65 Pilate said to them, “You have a guard of soldiers. Go, make it﻿* as secure as you know how.” 66 So they went with the guard of soldiers and﻿* made the tomb secure by﻿* sealing the stone. 
Jesus Is Raised
28 Now after the Sabbath, at the dawning on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to view the tomb. 2 And behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven and came up and﻿* rolled away the stone and sat down on it. 3 Now his appearance was like lightning and his clothing white as snow. 4 And the guards trembled from the fear of him and became like dead men. 5 But the angel answered and﻿* said to the women, “Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. 6 He is not here, for he has been raised, just as he said. Come, see the place where he was lying. 7 And go quickly, tell his disciples, ‘He has been raised from the dead, and behold, he is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there.’ Behold, I have told you.” 8 And they departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and﻿* ran to tell his disciples. 9 And behold, Jesus met them, saying, “Greetings!” And they came up and﻿* took hold of his feet and worshiped him. 10 Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid! Go tell my brothers that they should go to Galilee, and there they will see me.” 
The Guards Report the Body Stolen
11 And while﻿* they were going, behold, some of the guard of soldiers went into the city and﻿* reported to the chief priests everything that had happened. 12 And after they﻿* had assembled with the elders and had taken counsel, they gave a rather large sum of money to the soldiers, 13 telling them,* “Say ‘His disciples came during the night and﻿* stole him while﻿* we were sleeping.’ 14 And if this matter is heard before the governor, we will satisfy him and ⌊keep you out of trouble⌋.” 15 So they took the money and﻿* did as they were told, and spread abroad this report among the Jews until this very day. 
The Great Commission
16 So the eleven disciples proceeded to Galilee, to the mountain which Jesus had designated for them. 17 And when they﻿* saw him, they worshiped him,* but some doubted. 18 And Jesus approached and﻿* spoke to them, saying, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. 19 Therefore, go﻿* and﻿* make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, 20 teaching them to observe everything I have commanded you, and behold, I am with you all the days until the end of the age.

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK
 
John the Baptist Begins His Ministry
1 The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ. 2 Just as it is written in the prophet Isaiah, 
“Behold, I am sending my messenger before your face, 
who will prepare your way, 
3 the voice of one shouting in the wilderness, 
‘Prepare the way of the Lord, 
make straight his paths!’ ” 
4 John was there baptizing in the wilderness, proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins. 5 And all the Judean region and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem went out to him and were being baptized by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins. 6 And John was dressed in camel’s hair and a belt made of leather around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey. 7 And he was preaching, saying, “One who is more powerful than I is coming after me, of whom I am not worthy to bend down and﻿* untie the strap of his sandals. 8 I baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.” 
The Baptism of Jesus
9 And it happened that in those days Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John. 10 And immediately as he﻿* was coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens being split apart and the Spirit descending like a dove on him. 11 And a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.” 
The Temptation of Jesus
12 And immediately the Spirit drove him out into the wilderness. 13 And he was in the wilderness forty days being tempted by Satan. And he was with the wild animals, and the angels were ministering to him. 
Public Ministry in Galilee
14 And after John ⌊had been taken into custody⌋, Jesus went into Galilee proclaiming the gospel of God 15 and saying, “The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God has come near. Repent and believe in the gospel!” 
Jesus Calls His First Disciples
16 And as he﻿* was passing by along the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew, Simon’s brother, casting a net﻿* into the sea (for they were fishermen). 17 And Jesus said to them, “⌊Follow⌋ me and I will make you become fishers of people.” 18 And immediately they left their nets and﻿* followed him. 19 And going on a little farther, he saw James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, and they were in the boat mending the nets. 20 And immediately he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and﻿* went away after him. 21 And they went into Capernaum and immediately on the Sabbath he began to teach in the synagogue. 
A Man with an Unclean Spirit Healed
22 And they were amazed at his teaching, because he was teaching them like one who had authority, and not like the scribes. 23 And so then there was a man in their synagogue with an unclean spirit, and he cried out, 24 saying, “⌊Leave us alone⌋, Jesus the Nazarene! Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!” 25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent, and come out of him!” 26 And after﻿* convulsing him and crying out with a loud voice, the unclean spirit came out of him. 27 And they were all amazed, so that they began to discuss with one another, saying, “What is this? A new teaching with authority! He even commands the unclean spirits and they obey him.” 28 And the report about him then went out everywhere in the whole surrounding region of Galilee. 
Many at Capernaum Are Healed
29 And so then he departed from the synagogue and﻿* came into the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John. 30 Now Simon’s mother-in-law was lying down, suffering with a fever, and at once they told him about her. 31 And he came and﻿* raised her up by﻿* taking hold of her hand, and the fever left her, and she began to serve them. 
32 Now when it﻿* was evening, when the sun had set, they began bringing to him all those ⌊who were sick⌋ and those who were demon-possessed. 33 And the whole town was gathered together at the door. 34 And he healed many ⌊who were sick⌋ with various diseases and expelled many demons. And he did not permit the demons to speak, because they knew him. 
Preaching Throughout Galilee
35 And getting up early in the morning while it was very dark, he departed and went to a deserted place, and there he was praying. 36 And Simon and those who were with him searched diligently for him. 37 And they found him and said to him, “Everyone is looking for you!” 38 And he said to them, “Let us go elsewhere, into the neighboring rural towns, so that I can preach there also, because I have come out for this very reason.” 39 And he went into all Galilee preaching in their synagogues and expelling demons. 
A Leper Cleansed
40 And a leper came to him, entreating him and kneeling down, saying to him, “If you are willing, you are able to make me clean.” 41 And becoming angry, he stretched out his hand and﻿* touched him﻿*, and said to him, “I am willing; be made clean.” 42 And immediately the leprosy went away from him and he was made clean. 43 And warning him sternly, he sent him away at once. 44 And he said to him, “See to it that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and bring for your cleansing the things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. 45 But he went out and﻿* began to proclaim it﻿* freely and to spread abroad the account, so that he was no longer able to enter publicly into a town. But he was staying outside in deserted places, and they were coming to him from all directions. 
A Paralytic Healed
2 And when he﻿* entered again into Capernaum after some days, it became known that he was at home. 2 And many had gathered, so that there was no longer room, not even at the door, and he was speaking the word to them. 3 And they came bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them. 4 And when﻿* they were not able to bring him﻿* to him because of the crowd, they removed the roof where he was. And after﻿* digging through, they lowered the stretcher on which the paralytic was lying. 5 And when﻿* Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Child, your sins are forgiven.” 
6 Now some of the scribes were sitting there and reasoning in their hearts, 7 “Why does this man speak like this? He is blaspheming! Who is able to forgive sins except God alone?” 8 And immediately Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they were reasoning like this within themselves, said to them, “Why are you considering these things in your hearts? 9 Which is easier to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say ‘Get up and pick up your stretcher and walk’? 10 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins,”—he said to the paralytic—11 “I say to you, get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.” 12 And he got up and immediately picked up his stretcher and﻿* went out in front of them all, so that they were all amazed and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything﻿* like this!” 
Levi Called to Follow Jesus
13 And he went out again beside the sea, and all the crowd was coming to him, and he began to teach them. 14 And as he﻿* was passing by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax booth, and he said to him, “Follow me!” And he stood up and﻿* followed him. 
15 And it happened that he ⌊was dining⌋ in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners ⌊were dining with⌋ Jesus and his disciples, for there were many and they were following him. 16 And the scribes of the Pharisees, when they﻿* saw that he was eating with sinners and tax collectors, began to say to his disciples, “Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?” 17 And when﻿* Jesus heard it﻿*, he said to them, “Those who are healthy do not have need of a physician, but those ⌊who are sick⌋. I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.” 
On Fasting
18 And John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they came and said to him, “⌊Why⌋ do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?” 19 And Jesus said to them, “The ⌊bridegroom’s attendants⌋ are not able to fast while the bridegroom is with them, are they? As long a time as they have the bridegroom with them, they are not able to fast. 20 But days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast in that day. 21 No one sews a patch of unshrunken cloth on an old garment. ⌊Otherwise⌋ the patch pulls away from it—the new from the old—and the tear becomes worse. 22 And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. ⌊Otherwise⌋ the wine will burst the wineskins and the wine is destroyed and the wineskins too. But new wine is put into new wineskins.” 
Plucking Grain on the Sabbath
23 And it happened that he was going through the grain fields on the Sabbath, and his disciples began to make their way while﻿* plucking off the heads of grain. 24 And the Pharisees began to say to him, “Behold, why are they doing what is not permitted on the Sabbath?” 25 And he said to them, “Have you never read what David did when he had need and he and those who were with him were hungry—26 how he entered into the house of God in the time of Abiathar the high priest and ate the bread of the presentation, which it is not permitted to eat (except the priests) and also gave it﻿* to those who were with him?” 27 And he said to them, “The Sabbath was established for people, and not people for the Sabbath. 28 So then, the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.” 
A Man with a Withered Hand Healed
3 And he entered into the synagogue again, and a man who had a withered hand was there. 2 And they were watching him closely to see if he would heal him on the Sabbath, in order that they could accuse him. 3 And he said to the man who had the withered hand, “Come into the middle.” 4 And he said to them, “Is it permitted on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?” But they were silent. 5 And looking around at them with anger, grieved at the hardness of their hearts, he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it﻿* out, and his hand was restored. 6 And the Pharisees went out immediately with the Herodians ⌊and began to conspire⌋ against him with regard to how they could destroy him. 
Jesus Heals Crowds by the Sea
7 And Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, and a great crowd from Galilee followed him.* And from Judea 8 and from Jerusalem and from Idumea and the other side of the Jordan and around Tyre and Sidon a great crowd came to him because they﻿* heard all that he was doing. 9 And he told his disciples that a small boat should stand ready for him because of the crowd, so that they would not press upon him. 10 For he had healed many, so that all those who ⌊were suffering from diseases⌋ pressed about him in order that they could touch him. 11 And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, were falling down before him and crying out, saying, “You are the Son of God!” 12 And he warned them strictly that they should not make him known. 
The Selection of the Twelve Apostles
13 And he went up on the mountain and summoned those whom he wanted, and they came to him. 14 And he appointed twelve, so that they would be with him and so that he could send them out to preach 15 and to have authority to expel demons. 16 And he appointed the twelve. And to Simon he gave the name Peter, 17 and James the son of Zebedee and John the brother of James (and he gave to them the name Boanerges, that is, “Sons of Thunder”), 18 and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Zealot, 19 and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 
A House Divided Cannot Stand
20 And he went home, and the crowd gathered again, so that they were not even able to eat a meal. 21 And when﻿* ⌊his family⌋ heard this,* they went out to restrain him, for they were saying, “He has lost his mind!” 
22 And the scribes who had come down from Jerusalem were saying, “He is possessed by Beelzebul!” and “By the ruler of the demons he expels the demons!” 23 And he called them to himself and﻿* was speaking to them in parables, “How can Satan expel Satan? 24 And if a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom is not able to stand. 25 And if a house is divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand. 26 And if Satan has risen up against himself and is divided, he is not able to stand, but is at an end! 27 But no one is able to enter into the house of a strong man and﻿* plunder his property unless he first ties up the strong man, and then he can thoroughly plunder his house. 
28 “Truly I say to you that all the sins and the blasphemies will be forgiven the sons of men, however much they blaspheme. 29 But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit does not have forgiveness ⌊forever⌋, but is guilty of an eternal sin”—30 because they were saying, “He has an unclean spirit.” 
Jesus’ Mother and Brothers
31 And his mother and his brothers arrived, and standing outside, they sent word to him to summon him. 32 And a crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, “Behold, your mother and your brothers are outside looking for you.” 33 And he answered them and﻿* said, “Who is my mother or my brothers?” 34 And looking around at those who were sitting around him in a circle, he said, “Behold, my mother and my brothers! 35 For whoever does the will of God, this person is my brother and sister and mother.” 
The Parable of the Sower
4 And again he began to teach beside the sea, and a very large crowd was gathered to him, so that he got into a boat and﻿* sat on the sea, and the whole crowd was at the sea on the land. 2 And he began to teach them many things in parables, and was saying to them in his teaching, 3 “Listen! Behold, the sower went out to sow. 4 And it happened that while he was sowing, ⌊some seed⌋ fell on the side of the path, and the birds came and devoured it. 5 And other seed fell on the rocky ground where it did not have much soil, and it sprang up at once, because it did not have any depth of soil. 6 And when the sun rose it was scorched, and because it did not have enough root, it withered. 7 And other seed fell among the thorn plants, and the thorn plants came up and choked it, and it did not produce grain. 8 And other seed fell on the good soil, and produced grain, coming up and increasing, and it bore a crop﻿*—one thirty and one sixty and one a hundred times as much. 9 And he said, “Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear!” 
The Reason for the Parables
10 And when he was alone, those around him together with the twelve began asking him about the parables. 11 And he said to them, “To you has been granted the secret of the kingdom of God, but to those who are outside everything is in parables, 12 so that 
‘⌊they may look closely⌋ and not perceive, 
and ⌊they may listen carefully⌋ and not understand, 
lest they turn and it be forgiven them.’ ” 
The Parable of the Sower Interpreted
13 And he said to them, “Do you not understand this parable? And how will you understand all the parables? 14 The sower sows the word. 15 And these are the ones beside the path where the word is sown, and whenever they hear it,* immediately Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them. 16 And these are like the ones sown on the rocky ground, who whenever they hear the word immediately receive it with joy. 17 And they have no root in themselves, but are temporary. Then when﻿* affliction or persecution comes because of the word, immediately they fall away. 18 And others are the ones sown among the thorn plants—these are the ones who hear the word, 19 and the cares of the world and the deceitfulness of wealth and the desires for other things come in and﻿* choke the word and it becomes unproductive. 20 And those are the ones sown on the good soil, who hear the word and receive it﻿* and bear fruit—one thirty and one sixty and one a hundred times as much.” 
The Parable of the Lamp
21 And he said to them, “Surely a lamp is not brought so that it may be put under a bushel basket or under a bed, is it? Is it not so that it may be put on a lampstand? 22 For nothing is secret except so that it may be revealed, nor has become hidden except so that it will come to light. 23 If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!” 24 And he said to them, “Take care what you hear! With the measure by which you measure out, it will be measured out to you, and will be added to you. 25 For whoever has, more will be given to him, and whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.” 
The Parable of the Seed that Grows by Itself
26 And he said, “The kingdom of God is like this: like a man scatters seed on the ground. 27 And he sleeps and gets up, night and day, and the seed sprouts and grows—⌊he does not know how⌋. 28 By itself the soil produces a crop: first the grass, then the head of grain, then the full grain in the head. 29 But when the crop permits, he sends in the sickle right away, because the harvest has come.” 
The Parable of the Mustard Seed
30 And he said, “With what can we compare the kingdom of God, or by what parable can we present it? 31 It is like a mustard seed that when sown on the ground, although it﻿* is the smallest of all the seeds that are on the ground, 32 but when it is sown it grows up and becomes the largest of all the garden herbs, and sends out large branches so that the birds of the sky are able to nest in its shade.” 33 And with many parables such as these he was speaking the word to them, as they were able to hear it.* 34 And he did not speak to them without a parable, but in private he explained everything to his own disciples. 
Calming of a Storm
35 And on that day, when it﻿* was evening, he said to them, “Let us cross over to the other side.” 36 And leaving the crowd, they took him along, as he was, in the boat. And other boats were with him. 37 And a great storm of wind developed, and the waves were breaking into the boat, so that the boat was already being filled with water.* 38 And he was in the stern sleeping on the cushion, and they woke him up and said to him, “Teacher, is it not a concern to you that we are perishing?” 39 And he woke up and﻿* rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “Be quiet! Be silent!” And the wind abated and there was a great calm. 40 And he said to them, “Why are you fearful? Do you not yet have faith?” 41 And ⌊they were terribly frightened⌋ and began to say to one another, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?” 
A Demon-possessed Gerasene Healed
5 And they came to the other side of the sea, to the region of the Gerasenes. 2 And as﻿* he was getting out of the boat, immediately from the tombs a man with an unclean spirit went to meet him, 3 who ⌊lived⌋ among the tombs. And no one was able to bind him any longer, not even with a chain, 4 because he had often been bound with shackles and chains, and the chains had been torn apart by him, and the shackles had been shattered. And no one was strong enough to subdue him. 5 And during every night and day among the tombs and on the mountains he was crying out and cutting himself with stones. 6 And when he﻿* saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and knelt down before him. 7 And crying out with a loud voice he said, “⌊What have I to do with you⌋, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I implore you by God, do not torment me!” 8 (For he was saying to him, “Come out of the man, unclean spirit!”) 9 And he was asking him “⌊What is your name⌋?” And he said to him, “My name is Legion, because we are many.” 10 And he was imploring him many times that he would not send them out of the region. 11 Now a large herd of pigs was there at the hill feeding, 12 and they implored him, saying, “Send us to the pigs so that we may enter into them.” 13 And he permitted them. And the unclean spirits came out and﻿* entered into the pigs, and the herd—about two thousand—rushed headlong down the steep slope into the sea and were drowned in the sea. 14 And their herdsmen fled and reported it﻿* in the town and in the countryside, and they came to see what it was that had happened. 15 And they came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man sitting there clothed and in his right mind—the one who had had the legion—and they were afraid. 16 And those who had seen it﻿* described to them what had happened to the demon-possessed man, and about the pigs. 17 And they began to urge him to depart from their region. 18 And as﻿* he was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed began to implore him that he could go with him. 19 And he did not permit him, but said to him, “Go to your home to your people and tell them all that the Lord has done for you, and that he has had mercy on you.” 20 And he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis all that Jesus had done for him, and they were all astonished. 
A Woman Healed and a Daughter Raised
21 And after﻿* Jesus had crossed over again in the boat to the other side, a large crowd gathered to him, and he was beside the sea. 22 And one of the rulers of the synagogue came—Jairus by name—and when he﻿* saw him, he fell down at his feet. 23 And he was imploring him many times, saying, “My little daughter ⌊is at the point of death⌋! Come, lay your hands on her, so that she will get well and will live.” 24 And he went with him, and a large crowd was following him and pressing around him. 
25 And there was a woman who was ⌊suffering from hemorrhages⌋ twelve years. 26 And she had endured many things under many physicians, and had spent ⌊all that she had⌋ and had received no help at all, but instead ⌊became worse⌋. 27 When she﻿* heard about Jesus, she came up in the crowd behind him and﻿* touched his cloak, 28 for she was saying, “If I touch just his clothing, I will be healed!” 29 And immediately her ⌊hemorrhage stopped⌋ and she realized in her body that she was healed of her suffering. 30 And immediately Jesus, perceiving in himself that power had gone out from himself, turned around in the crowd and﻿* said, “Who touched my clothing?” 31 And his disciples said to him, “You see the crowd pressing upon you, and you say ‘Who touched me?’ ” 32 And he was looking around to see the one who had done this. 33 So the woman, frightened and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth. 34 But he said to her, “Daughter, your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be well from your suffering.” 
35 While﻿* he was still speaking, they came from the synagogue ruler’s house﻿* saying, “Your daughter has died. Why trouble the Teacher further?” 36 But Jesus, ignoring ⌊what was said⌋, told the ruler of the synagogue, “Do not be afraid—only believe!” 37 And he did not allow anyone to follow along with him except Peter and James and John, the brother of James. 38 And they came to the house of the ruler of the synagogue and saw a commotion, and people weeping and wailing loudly. 39 And when he﻿* entered, he said to them, “Why are you agitated and weeping? The child is not dead, but is sleeping.” 40 And they began laughing at him. But he sent them all out and﻿* took along the father and mother of the child, and those who were with him, and went in to where the child was. 41 And taking hold of the child’s hand, he said to her, “Talitha koum!” (which is translated, “Little girl, I say to you, get up!”), 42 and immediately the girl stood up and began walking around (for she was twelve years old). And ⌊immediately they were utterly and completely astonished⌋. 43 And he commanded them strictly that no one should learn of this, and said to give her something﻿* to eat. 
Rejected at Nazareth
6 And he went out from there and came to his hometown, and his disciples followed him. 2 And when﻿* the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him﻿* were amazed, saying, “Where did this man get these things? And what is this wisdom that has been granted to this man, and the miracles such as these performed through his hands? 3 Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us?” And they were offended by him. 4 And Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown, and among his relatives, and in his own household.” 5 And he was not able to do any miracle in that place except to lay his hands on a few sick people and﻿* heal them.* 6 And he was astonished because of their unbelief. 
The Twelve Commissioned and Sent Out
And he was going around among the villages teaching. 7 And he summoned the twelve and began to send them out two by two, and gave them authority over the unclean spirits. 8 And he commanded them that they take along nothing for the journey except only a staff—no bread, no traveler’s bag, no money in their belts—9 but to put on sandals and not to wear two tunics. 10 And he said to them, “Whenever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from there. 11 And whatever place does not welcome you or listen to you, as you﻿* go out from there, shake off the dust that is on your feet for a testimony against them.” 12 And they went out and﻿* proclaimed that people﻿* should repent. 13 And they were expelling many demons and anointing many sick people with olive oil and healing them.* 
Herod Kills John the Baptist
14 And King Herod heard it,* because his name had become known. And they were saying, “John, the one who baptizes, has been raised from the dead, and because of this these miraculous powers are at work in him.” 15 But others were saying, “He is Elijah,” and others were saying, “He is a prophet like one of the prophets.” 16 But when﻿* Herod heard it,* he said, “John whom I beheaded—this one has been raised!” 17 For Herod himself had sent and﻿* arrested John and bound him in prison because of Herodias, the wife of Philip his brother, because he had married her. 18 For John had been saying to Herod, “It is not permitted for you to have your brother’s wife.” 19 So Herodias held a grudge against him and was wanting to kill him, and was not able to do so. 20 For Herod was afraid of John, because he﻿* knew him to be a righteous and holy man and protected him. And when he﻿* listened to him, he was greatly perplexed, and yet he listened to him gladly. 21 And a suitable day came when Herod, on his birthday, gave a banquet for his courtiers and military tribunes and the most prominent men of Galilee. 22 And when the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced and pleased Herod and ⌊his dinner guests⌋, the king said to the girl, “Ask me for whatever you want, and I will give it﻿* to you.” 23 And he swore to her, “Anything whatever you ask me for I will give you, up to half my kingdom!” 24 And she went out and﻿* said to her mother, “What should I ask for?” And she said, “The head of John the baptizer.” 25 And she came in immediately with haste to the king and﻿* asked, saying, “I want you to give me the head of John the Baptist on a platter immediately.” 26 And although he﻿* was deeply grieved, the king, because of his oaths and ⌊dinner guests⌋, did not want to refuse her. 27 And immediately the king sent an executioner and﻿* ordered him﻿* to bring his head. And he went and﻿* beheaded him in the prison. 28 And he brought his head on a platter and gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother. 29 And when﻿* his disciples heard this,* they came and took away his corpse and placed it in a tomb. 
The Feeding of Five Thousand
30 And the apostles regathered to Jesus and reported to him everything that they had done and that they had taught. 31 And he said to them, “You yourselves come privately to an isolated place and rest for a short time.” For those who were coming and going were many, and they did not even have time to eat. 32 And they went away in the boat to an isolated place by themselves. 33 And many people saw them leaving and recognized them,* and ran there together by land from all the towns, and arrived ahead of them. 34 And getting out of the boat﻿* he saw the large crowd and had compassion on them, because they were like sheep ⌊without⌋ a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things. 35 And the hour had already become late when﻿* his disciples came up to him, saying, “The place is desolate and the hour is already late. 36 Send them away so that they can go into the surrounding farms and villages and﻿* purchase something to eat for themselves.” 37 But he answered and﻿* said to them, “You give them something﻿* to eat.” And they said to him, “Should we go and﻿* purchase bread for two hundred denarii and give it﻿* to them to eat?” 38 And he said to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go look!” And when they﻿* found out, they said, “Five, and two fish.” 39 And he ordered them all to recline in groups on the green grass. 40 And they reclined in groups, by hundreds and by fifties. 41 And taking the five loaves and the two fish and﻿* looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves and gave them﻿* to his disciples so that they could set them﻿* before them. And he distributed the two fish to them all. 42 And they all ate and were satisfied. 43 And they picked up the broken pieces, twelve baskets full, and of the fish. 44 And those who ate the loaves were five thousand men. 
Jesus Walks on the Water
45 And immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself dismissed the crowd. 46 And after he﻿* had said farewell to them, he went away to the mountain to pray. 47 And when﻿* evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea and he was alone on the land. 48 And he saw them being beaten in their rowing because the wind was against them. Around the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea, and he was wanting to pass by them. 49 But when﻿* they saw him walking on the sea, they thought that it was a ghost, and they cried out. 50 For they all saw him and were terrified. But immediately he spoke with them and said to them, “Have courage, I am he! Do not be afraid!” 51 And he went up with them into the boat, and the wind abated. And ⌊they were extraordinarily⌋ astounded within themselves, 52 because they did not understand concerning the loaves, but their hearts were hardened. 
Many Healed at Gennesaret
53 And after they﻿* had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret and anchored there. 54 And as they were getting out of the boat, people﻿* recognized him immediately. 55 They ran about through that whole region and began to carry around those ⌊who were sick⌋ on stretchers, wherever they heard that he was. 56 And wherever he would go, into villages or into towns or to farms, they would put those who were sick in the marketplaces and would implore him that if they could touch even the edge of his cloak. And all those who touched it were healed. 
Human Traditions and God’s Commandments
7 And the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered to him. 2 And they saw that some of his disciples were eating their bread with unclean—that is, unwashed—hands. 3 (For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands ⌊ritually⌋, thus﻿* holding fast to the traditions of the elders. 4 And when they come from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they wash. And there are many other traditions﻿* which they have received and﻿* hold fast to—for example, the washing of cups and pitchers and bronze kettles and dining couches.) 5 And the Pharisees and the scribes asked him, “Why do your disciples not live according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with unclean hands?” 6 So he said to them, “Isaiah prophesied correctly about you hypocrites, as it is written, 
‘This people honors me with their lips, 
but their heart is far, far away from me. 
7 And they worship me in vain, 
teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’ 
8 Abandoning the commandment of God, you hold fast to the tradition of men.” 
9 And he said to them, “You splendidly ignore the commandment of God so that you can keep your tradition. 10 For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘The one who speaks evil of father or mother ⌊must certainly die⌋.’ 11 But you say, ‘If a man says to his father or to his mother, “Whatever ⌊benefit you would have received⌋ from me is corban” (that is, a gift to God), 12 you no longer permit him to do anything for his father or his mother, 13 thus﻿* making void the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down, and you do many similar things such as this.” 
Defilement from Within
14 And summoning the crowd again, he said to them, “Listen to me, all of you, and understand: 15 There is nothing outside of a person that is able to defile him by﻿* going into him. But the things that go out of a person are the things that defile a person.” 17 And when he entered into the house away from the crowd, his disciples asked him about the parable. 18 And he said to them, “So are you also without understanding? Do you not understand that everything that is outside that goes into a person is not able to defile him? 19 For it does not enter into his heart but into his stomach, and goes out into the latrine”—thus﻿* declaring all foods clean. 20 And he said, “What comes out of a person, that defiles a person. 21 For from within, from the heart of people, come evil plans, sexual immoralities, thefts, murders, 22 adulteries, acts of greed, malicious deeds, deceit, licentiousness, ⌊envy⌋, abusive speech, pride, foolishness. 23 All these evil things come from within and defile a person.” 
A Syrophoenician Woman’s Great Faith
24 And from there he set out and﻿* went to the region of Tyre. And when he﻿* entered into a house, he wanted no one to know, and yet he was not able to escape notice. 25 But immediately a woman whose young daughter was possessed by an unclean spirit, when she﻿* heard about him, came and﻿* fell down at his feet, 26 Now the woman was a Greek—a Syrophoenician by nationality—and she was asking him that he would expel the demon from her daughter. 27 And he said to her, “Let the children be satisfied first, for it is not right to take the children’s bread and throw it﻿* to the dogs!” 28 But she answered and said to him, “Lord, even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.” 29 And he said to her, “Because of this statement, go! The demon has gone out of your daughter.” 30 And when she﻿* went to her home, she found the child lying on the bed and the demon gone. 
A Man Deaf and Unable to Speak Healed
31 And again he went away from the region of Tyre and﻿* came through Sidon to the Sea of Galilee, within the region of the Decapolis. 32 And they brought to him a man who was deaf and had difficulty speaking, and they were imploring him that he would place his hand on him. 33 And he took him away from the crowd by himself and﻿* put his fingers into his ears, and after﻿* spitting, he touched his tongue. 34 And looking up to heaven, he sighed and said to him, “Ephphatha!” (that is, “Be opened!”). 35 And his ears were opened and ⌊his difficulty in speaking was removed⌋ and he began to speak normally. 36 And he ordered them that they should say nothing, but as much as he ordered them not to, they proclaimed it﻿* even more instead. 37 And they were amazed beyond all measure, saying, “He has done all things well! He even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak!” 
The Feeding of Four Thousand
8 In those days there was﻿* again a large crowd, and they did not have﻿* anything they could eat. Summoning the disciples, he said to them, 2 “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have remained with me three days already and do not have anything to eat. 3 And if I send them away hungry to their homes they will give out on the way, and some of them have come from far away.” 4 And his disciples answered him, “Where is anyone able to feed these people with bread here in the desert?” 5 And he asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” So they said, “Seven.” 6 And he commanded the crowd to recline for a meal on the ground, and taking the seven loaves, after he﻿* had given thanks he broke them﻿* and began giving them﻿* to his disciples so that they could set them﻿* before them.* And they set them﻿* before the crowd. 7 And they had a few small fish, and after﻿* giving thanks for them, he said to set these before them also. 8 And they ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces that were left, seven baskets full. 9 Now there were about four thousand. And he sent them away. 10 And immediately he got into the boat with his disciples and﻿* went to the district of Dalmanutha. 
Pharisees Demand a Sign
11 And the Pharisees came and began to argue with him, demanding from him a sign from heaven in order to﻿* test him. 12 And sighing deeply in his spirit, he said, “Why does this generation demand a sign? Truly I say to you, no sign will be given to this generation!” 13 And he left them, got into the boat﻿* again, and﻿* went to the other side. 
Beware the Leaven of the Pharisees and Herod
14 And they had forgotten to take bread, and except for one loaf, they did not have any﻿* with them in the boat. 15 And he ordered them, saying, “Watch out! Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod!” 16 And they began to discuss with one another that they had no bread. 17 And knowing this,* he said to them, “Why are you discussing that you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive or understand? Have your hearts been hardened? 18 Although you﻿* have eyes, do you not see? And although you﻿* have ears, do you not hear? And do you not remember? 19 When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand how many baskets full of broken pieces did you pick up?” They said to him, “Twelve.” 20 “When I also broke﻿* the seven loaves﻿* for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you pick up?” And they said to him, “Seven.” 21 And he said to them, “Do you not yet understand?” 
A Blind Man Healed at Bethsaida
22 And they came to Bethsaida. And they brought to him a blind man and implored him that he would touch him. 23 And he took hold of the blind man’s hand and﻿* led him outside the village, and after﻿* spitting in his eyes, he placed his hands on him and﻿* asked him, “Do you see anything?” 24 And looking up he said, “I see people, for I see them﻿* like trees walking around.” 25 Then he placed his hands on his eyes again, and he opened his eyes and was cured, and could see everything clearly. 26 And he sent him to his home, saying, “Do not even go into the village.” 
Peter’s Confession at Caesarea Philippi
27 And Jesus and his disciples went out to the villages of Caesarea Philippi, and on the way he asked his disciples, saying to them, “Who do people say that I am?” 28 And they told him, saying, “John the Baptist, and others Elijah, and others that you are one of the prophets.” 29 And he asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered and﻿* said to him, “You are the Christ!” 30 And he warned them that they should tell no one about him. 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection
31 And he began to teach them that it was necessary for the Son of Man to suffer many things and to be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes, and to be killed, and after three days to rise. 32 And he was speaking openly about the subject, and Peter took him aside and﻿* began to rebuke him. 33 But turning around and seeing his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind me, Satan, because you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but the things of people!” 
Taking Up One’s Cross to Follow Jesus
34 And summoning the crowd together with his disciples, he said to them, “If anyone wants to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. 35 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life on account of me and of the gospel will save it. 36 For what does it benefit a person to gain the whole world and forfeit his life? 37 For what can a person give in exchange for his life? 38 For whoever is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will also be ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.” 
9 And he said to them, “Truly I say to you, that there are some of those standing here who will never experience death until they see the kingdom of God having come with power.” 
The Transfiguration
2 And after six days, Jesus took along Peter and James and John, and led them to a high mountain by themselves alone. And he was transfigured before them, 3 and his clothing became radiant—extremely white, like no cloth refiner on earth can ⌊make so white⌋. 4 And Elijah appeared to them together with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus. 5 And Peter answered and﻿* said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good that we are here! And let us make three shelters, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.” 6 (For he did not know what he should answer, because they were terrified.) 7 And a cloud came, overshadowing them, and a voice came from the cloud, “This is my beloved Son. Listen to him!” 8 And suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone with them but Jesus alone. 
9 And as﻿* they were coming down from the mountain, he ordered them that they should tell no one the things that they had seen, except when the Son of Man had risen from the dead. 10 And they kept the matter to themselves, discussing what this rising from the dead ⌊meant⌋. 11 And they asked him, saying, “⌊Why do⌋ the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” 12 And he said to them, “Elijah indeed does come first and﻿* restores all things. And how is it written concerning the Son of Man that he should suffer many things and be treated with contempt? 13 But I tell you that indeed Elijah has come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.” 
A Demon-possessed Boy Healed
14 And when they﻿* came to the disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and scribes arguing with them. 15 And immediately the whole crowd, when they﻿* saw him, were amazed, and ran up to him﻿* and﻿* greeted him. 16 And he asked them, “What are you arguing about with them?” 17 And one individual from the crowd answered him, “Teacher, I brought to you my son who has ⌊a spirit that makes him mute⌋. 18 And whenever it seizes him, it throws him down and he foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth and becomes paralyzed. And I told your disciples that they should expel it, and they were not able to do so.* 19 And he answered them and﻿* said, “O unbelieving generation! ⌊How long⌋ will I be with you? ⌊How long⌋ must I put up with you? Bring him to me!” 20 And they brought him to him. And when he﻿* saw him, the spirit immediately convulsed him, and falling on the ground, he began to roll around, foaming at the mouth. 21 And he asked his father how long it was since this had been happening to him. And he said, “From childhood. 22 And often it has thrown him both into fire and into water, in order that it could destroy him. But if you are able to do anything, have compassion on us and﻿* help us!” 23 But Jesus said to him, “If you are able! All things are possible for the one who believes!” 24 Immediately the father of the child cried out and﻿* said, “I believe! Help my unbelief!” 25 Now when﻿* Jesus saw that a crowd was running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, “Mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and enter into him no more!” 26 And it came out, screaming and convulsing him﻿* greatly, and he became as if he were dead, so that most of them said, “He has died!” 27 But Jesus took hold of his hand and﻿* raised him up, and he stood up. 28 And after﻿* he had entered into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why were we not able to expel it?” 29 And he said to them, “This kind can come out by nothing except by prayer.” 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection a Second Time
30 And from there they went out and﻿* passed through Galilee. And he did not want anyone to know, 31 for he was teaching his disciples and was telling them, “The Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of men, and they will kill him. And when he﻿* is killed, after three days he will rise.” 32 But they did not understand the statement, and they were afraid to ask him. 
The Question About Who Is Greatest
33 And they came to Capernaum. And after he﻿* was in the house, he asked them, “What were you discussing on the way?” 34 But they were silent, because they had argued with one another on the way about who was greatest. 35 And he sat down and﻿* called the twelve and said to them, “If anyone wants to be first, he will be last of all and servant of all.” 36 And he took a young child and﻿* had him stand ⌊among them⌋. And taking him in his arms, he said to them, 37 “Whoever welcomes one of the young children such as these in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me does not welcome me, but the one who sent me.” 
Whoever Is Not Against Us Is for Us
38 John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone expelling demons in your name, and we tried to prevent him because he was not following us.” 39 But Jesus said, “Do not prevent him, because there is no one who does a miracle in my name and will be able soon afterward to speak evil of me. 40 For whoever is not against us is for us. 41 For whoever gives you a cup of water to drink in my name because you are Christ’s, truly I say to you that he will never lose his reward. 
Temptations to Sin
42 “And whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it is better for him if instead ⌊a large millstone⌋ is placed around his neck and he is thrown into the sea. 43 And if your hand causes you to sin, cut it off! It is better for you to enter into life crippled than, having two hands, to go into hell—into the unquenchable fire! 45 And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off! It is better for you to enter into life lame than, having two feet, to be thrown into hell! 47 And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out! It is better for you to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye than, having two eyes, to be thrown into hell, 48 ‘where their worm does not die and the fire is not extinguished.’ 49 For everyone will be salted with fire. 50 Salt is good, but if the salt becomes deprived of its salt content, by what can you make it salty? Have salt among yourselves, and be at peace with one another.” 
On Divorce
10 And from there he set out and﻿* came to the region of Judea and the other side of the Jordan, and again crowds came together to him. And again, as he was accustomed to do,* he began to teach them. 2 And they asked him if it was permitted for a man to divorce his wife, in order to﻿* test him. 3 And he answered and﻿* said to them, “What did Moses command you?” 4 So they said, “Moses permitted a man﻿* to write a certificate of divorce and to send her﻿* away.” 5 But Jesus said to them, “He wrote this commandment for you because of your hardness of heart. 6 But from the beginning of creation ‘he made them male and female. 7 Because of this a man will leave his father and mother and will be joined to his wife, 8 and the two will become one flesh,’ so that they are no longer two but one flesh. 9 Therefore what God has joined together, man must not separate.” 
10 And in the house again the disciples began to ask him about this. 11 And he said to them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her. 12 And if she divorces her husband and﻿* marries another, she commits adultery.” 
Little Children Brought to Jesus
13 And they were bringing young children to him so that he could touch them, but the disciples rebuked them. 14 But when﻿* Jesus saw it,* he was indignant, and said to them, “Let the young children come to me. Do not forbid them, ⌊for to such belongs⌋ the kingdom of God. 15 Truly I say to you, whoever does not welcome the kingdom of God like a young child will never enter into it.” 16 And after﻿* taking them﻿* into his arms, he blessed them, placing his hands on them. 
A Rich Young Man
17 And as﻿* he was setting out on his way, one individual ran up and knelt down before him and﻿* asked him, “Good Teacher, what must I do so that I will inherit eternal life?” 18 So Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone. 19 You know the commandments: ‘Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony, do not defraud, honor your father and mother.’ ” 20 And he said to him, “Teacher, all these I have observed from my youth.” 21 And Jesus, looking at him, loved him, and said to him, “You lack one thing: Go, sell all that you have, and give the proceeds﻿* to the poor—and you will have treasure in heaven—and come, follow me.” 22 But he looked gloomy at the statement and﻿* went away sorrowful, ⌊because he had⌋ many possessions. 
23 And Jesus looked around and﻿* said to his disciples, “How ⌊difficult it is for⌋ those who possess wealth to enter into the kingdom of God!” 24 And the disciples were astounded at his words. But Jesus answered and﻿* said to them again, “Children, how difficult it is to enter into the kingdom of God! 25 It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter into the kingdom of God.” 26 And they were very astounded, saying to one another, “And who can be saved?” 27 Jesus looked at them and﻿* said, “With human beings it is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible with God.” 28 Peter began to say to him, “Behold, we have left everything and followed you.” 29 Jesus said, “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields on account of me and on account of the gospel 30 ⌊who will not⌋ receive a hundred times as much now in this time—houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and fields, together with persecutions—and in the age to come, eternal life. 31 But many who are first will be last, and the last first.” 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection a Third Time
32 Now they were on the road going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going on ahead of them. And they were astounded, but those who were following him﻿* were afraid. And taking aside the twelve again, he began to tell them the things that were about to happen to him: 33 “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and will hand him over to the Gentiles. 34 And they will mock him and spit on him and flog him and kill him,* and after three days he will rise.” 
A Request by James and John
35 And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came up to him and﻿* said to him, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask you.” 36 And he said to them, “What do you want that I do for you?” 37 So they said to him, “Grant to us that we may sit one at your right hand and one at your left in your glory.” 38 But Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you are asking! Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?” 39 And they said to him, “We are able.” So Jesus said to them, “You will drink the cup that I drink, and you will be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, 40 but to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to grant, but is for those for whom it has been prepared.” 41 And when they﻿* heard this,* the ten began to be indignant about James and John. 42 And Jesus called them to himself and﻿* said to them, “You know that those who are considered to rule over the Gentiles lord it over them, and their people in high positions exercise authority over them. 43 But it is not like this among you! But whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, 44 and whoever wants to be most prominent among you must be the slave of all. 45 For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.” 
A Blind Man Healed at Jericho
46 And they came to Jericho. And as﻿* he was setting out from Jericho along with his disciples and a large crowd, a blind beggar, Bartimaeus the son of Timaeus, was sitting beside the road. 47 And when he﻿* heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out and say, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!” 48 And many people warned him that he should be quiet. But he was crying out ⌊even more loudly⌋, “Son of David, have mercy on me!” 49 And Jesus stopped and﻿* said, “Call him.” And they called the blind man and﻿* said to him, “Have courage! Get up! He is calling you.” 50 And he threw off his cloak, jumped up, and﻿* came to Jesus. 51 And Jesus answered him and﻿* said, “What do you want ⌊me to do⌋ for you?” And the blind man said to him, “Rabboni, that I may regain my sight.” 52 And Jesus said to him, “Go, your faith has healed you.” And immediately he regained his sight and began to follow him on the road. 
The Triumphal Entry
11 And when they came near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples 2 and said to them, “Go into the village before you, and right away as you﻿* enter into it you will find a colt tied, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it.* 3 And if anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say ‘The Lord has need of it, and will send it here again at once.’ ” 4 And they went away and found a colt tied at a door outside in the street, and they untied it. 5 And some of those who were standing there said to them, “What are you doing, untying the colt?” 6 So they told them, just as Jesus had said, and they allowed them to take it. 7 And they brought the colt to Jesus and threw their cloaks over it, and he sat on it. 8 And many people spread their cloaks on the road, and others spread﻿* leafy branches they﻿* had cut from the fields. 9 And those who went ahead and those who were following were shouting, 
“Hosanna! 
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord! 
10 Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! 
Hosanna in the highest heaven!”* 
11 And he went into Jerusalem to the temple, and after﻿* looking around at everything, because﻿* the hour was already late, he went out to Bethany with the twelve. 
A Barren Fig Tree Cursed
12 And on the next day as﻿* they were departing from Bethany, he was hungry. 13 And when he﻿* saw from a distance a fig tree that had leaves, he went to see if perhaps he would find anything on it. And when he﻿* came up to it he found nothing except leaves, because it was not the season for figs. 14 And he responded and﻿* said to it, “Let no one eat fruit from you any more ⌊forever⌋!” And his disciples heard it.* 
The Cleansing of the Temple
15 And they came to Jerusalem. And he entered into the temple courts﻿* and﻿* began to drive out those who were selling and those who were buying in the temple courts,* and overturned the tables of the money changers and the chairs of those who were selling doves. 16 And he did not permit anyone to carry objects through the temple courts.* 17 And he began to teach and was saying to them, “Is it not written, 
‘My house will be called a house of prayer 
for all the nations,’ 
but you have made it a cave of robbers!” 18 And the chief priests and the scribes heard it,* and began considering how they could destroy him. For they were afraid of him because the whole crowd was astounded by his teaching. 19 And when evening came they went out of the city. 
The Barren Fig Tree Withered
20 And as they﻿* passed by early in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots. 21 And Peter remembered and﻿* said to him, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree that you cursed has withered!” 22 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Have faith in God! 23 Truly I say to you that whoever says to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea!’ and does not doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him. 24 For this reason I say to you, whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you have received it,* and it will be done for you. 25 And whenever you stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive him,* so that your Father who is in heaven will also forgive you your sins.” 
Jesus’ Authority Challenged
27 And they came again to Jerusalem. And as﻿* he was walking in the temple courts,* the chief priests and the scribes and the elders came up to him 28 and said to him, “By what authority are you doing these things, or who gave you this authority that you do these things?” 29 So Jesus said to them, “I will ask you one question. Answer me and I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things. 30 The baptism of John—was it from heaven or from men? Answer me!” 31 And they began to discuss this﻿* with one another, saying, “What should we say? If we say ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 32 But if we say, ‘From men’ ”—they were afraid of the crowd, because they all looked upon John ⌊as truly a prophet⌋. 33 And they replied to Jesus saying, “We do not know.” And Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.” 
The Parable of the Tenant Farmers in the Vineyard
12 And he began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard, and put a fence around it, and dug a trough for the winepress, and built a watchtower, and leased it to tenant farmers, and went on a journey. 2 And he sent a slave to the tenant farmers at the proper time, so that he could collect some of the fruit of the vineyard from the tenant farmers. 3 And they seized him and﻿* beat him﻿* and sent him﻿* away empty-handed. 4 And again he sent to them another slave, and that one they struck on the head and dishonored. 5 And he sent another, and that one they killed. And he sent﻿* many others, some of whom they beat and some of whom they killed. 6 He had one more, a beloved son. Last of all he sent him to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ 7 But those tenant farmers said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and the inheritance will be ours!’ 8 And they seized and﻿* killed him and threw him out of the vineyard. 9 What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the tenant farmers and give the vineyard to others. 10 Have you not read this scripture: 
‘The stone which the builders rejected, 
this has become ⌊the cornerstone⌋. 
11 This came about from the Lord, 
and it is marvelous in our eyes’?” 
12 And they were seeking to arrest him, and they were afraid of the crowd, because they knew that he had told the parable with reference to them. And they left him and﻿* went away. 
Paying Taxes to Caesar
13 And they sent some of the Pharisees and the Herodians to him so that they could catch him unawares in a statement. 14 And when they﻿* came, they said to him, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful and ⌊you do not care what anyone thinks⌋, ⌊because you do not regard the opinion of people⌋ but teach the way of God in truth. Is it permitted to pay taxes to Caesar or not? Should we pay or should we not pay?” 15 But because he﻿* knew their hypocrisy, he said to them, “Why are you testing me? Bring me a denarius so that I can look at it!”* 16 So they brought one.* And he said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?” And they said to him, “Caesar’s.” 17 And Jesus said to them, “Give to Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God!” And they were utterly amazed at him. 
A Question About Marriage and the Resurrection
18 And Sadducees—who say there is no resurrection—came up to him and began to ask him, saying, 19 “Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if someone’s brother dies and he leaves behind a wife and does not leave a child, that his brother should take the wife and ⌊father⌋ descendants for his brother. 20 There were seven brothers, and the first took a wife. And when he﻿* died, he did not leave descendants. 21 And the second took her, and he died without leaving descendants. And the third likewise. 22 And the seven did not leave descendants. Last of all the woman also died. 23 In the resurrection, when they rise, ⌊whose⌋ wife will she be? For the seven had her as wife. 24 Jesus said to them, “Are you not deceived because of this, because you﻿* do not know the scriptures or the power of God? 25 For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. 26 Now concerning the dead, that they are raised, have you not read in the book of Moses ⌊in the passage about the bush⌋ how God spoke to him, saying, ‘I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob’? 27 He is not God of the dead, but of the living. You are very much mistaken!” 
The Greatest Commandment
28 And one of the scribes came up and﻿* heard them debating. When he﻿* saw that he answered them well, he asked him, “Which commandment is the most important of all?” 29 Jesus answered, “The most important is, ‘Listen, Israel! The Lord our God, the Lord is one. 30 And you shall love the Lord your God from your whole heart and from your whole soul and from your whole mind and from your whole strength.’ 31 The second is this: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.” 32 And the scribe said to him, “That is true, Teacher. You have said ⌊correctly⌋ that he is one and there is no other except him. 33 And to love him from your whole heart and from your whole understanding and from your whole strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself, is much more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.” 34 And Jesus, when he﻿* saw that he had answered thoughtfully, said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” And no one dared to put a question to him any longer. 
David’s Son and Lord
35 And continuing, Jesus said while﻿* teaching in the temple courts,* “How can the scribes say that the Christ is David’s son? 36 David himself said by the Holy Spirit, 
‘The Lord said to my Lord, 
“Sit at my right hand, 
until I put your enemies 
under your feet.” ’ 
37 David himself calls him ‘Lord,’ and how is he his son?” And the large crowd was listening to him gladly. 
Warning to Beware of the Scribes
38 And in his teaching he said, “Beware of the scribes, who like walking around in long robes and greetings in the marketplaces 39 and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets, 40 who devour the houses of widows and pray lengthy prayers for the sake of appearance. These will receive more severe condemnation!” 
A Poor Widow’s Offering
41 And he sat down opposite the contribution box and﻿* was observing how the crowd was putting coins into the contribution box. And many rich people were putting in many coins. 42 And one poor widow came and﻿* put in two small copper coins (that is, a penny). 43 And summoning his disciples, he said to them, “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than all those who put offerings﻿* into the contribution box. 44 For they all ⌊contributed⌋ out of their abundance, but she out of her poverty put in everything she had, her whole means of subsistence.” 
The Destruction of the Temple Predicted
13 And as﻿* he was going out of the temple courts,* one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, look! What great stones and what wonderful buildings!” 2 And Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? Not one stone will be left here on another stone that will not be thrown down!” 
Signs of the End of the Age
3 And as﻿* he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, 4 “Tell us, when will these things happen, and what will be the sign when all these things are about to be accomplished?” 5 So Jesus began to say to them, “Watch out that no one deceives you! 6 Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and they will deceive many. 7 And when you hear about wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. This must happen, but the end is not yet. 8 For nation will rise up against nation and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places. There will be famines. These things are the beginning of birth pains. 
Persecution of Disciples Predicted
9 “But you, watch out for yourselves! They will hand you over to councils and you will be beaten in the synagogues and will have to stand before governors and kings because of me, for a witness to them. 10 And the gospel must first be proclaimed to all the nations. 11 And when they arrest you and﻿* hand you over, do not be anxious beforehand what you should say, but whatever is given to you at that hour, say this. For you are not the ones who are speaking, but the Holy Spirit. 12 And brother will hand over brother to death, and a father his﻿* child, and children will rise up against parents and have them put to death. 13 And you will be hated by all because of my name. But the one who endures to the end—this one will be saved. 
The Abomination of Desolation
14 “But when you see the abomination of desolation standing where it should not be” (let the one who reads understand), “then those in Judea must flee to the mountains! 15 The one who is on his housetop must not come down or go inside to take anything out of his house, 16 and the one who is in the field must not turn back to pick up his cloak. 17 And woe to those ⌊who are pregnant⌋ and to those who are nursing their babies﻿* in those days! 18 But pray that it will not happen in winter. 19 For in those days there will be tribulation of such a kind as has not happened from the beginning of the creation that God created until now, and never will happen. 20 And if the Lord had not shortened the days, ⌊no human being would be saved⌋. But for the sake of the elect, whom he chose, he has shortened the days. 
21 “And at that time if anyone should say to you, “Behold, here is the Christ,’ ‘Behold, there he is,’ do not believe him!* 22 For false messiahs and false prophets will appear, and will produce signs and wonders in order to mislead, if possible, the elect. 23 But you, watch out! I have told you everything ahead of time! 
The Arrival of the Son of Man
24 “But in those days, after that tribulation, 
‘the sun will be darkened 
and the moon will not give its light, 
25 and the stars will be falling from heaven, 
and the powers in the heavens will be shaken.’ 
26 And then they will see the Son of Man arriving in the clouds with great power and glory. 27 And then he will send out the angels, and will gather the elect together from the four winds, from the end of the earth to the end of heaven. 
The Parable of the Fig Tree
28 “Now learn the parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch has already become tender and puts forth its leaves, you know that summer is near. 29 So also you, when you see these things happening, know that he is near, at the door. 30 Truly I say to you that this generation will never pass away until all these things take place! 31 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away. 
The Unknown Day and Hour
32 “But concerning that day or hour no one knows—not even the angels in heaven nor the Son—except the Father. 33 Watch out! Be alert, because you do not know when the time is! 34 It is like a man away on a journey, who left his house and gave his slaves authority—to each one his work—and to the doorkeeper he gave orders that he should be on the alert. 35 Therefore be on the alert, for you do not know when the master of the house is coming—whether in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or early in the morning—36 lest he arrive suddenly and﻿* find you sleeping. 37 And what I say to you, I say to everyone: Be on the alert!” 
The Chief Priests and Scribes Plot to Kill Jesus
14 Now after two days it was the Passover and the feast of Unleavened Bread, and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how, after﻿* arresting him by stealth, they could kill him.* 2 For they said, “Not at the feast, lest there be an uproar by the people.” 
Jesus’ Anointing at Bethany
3 And while﻿* he was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as﻿* he was reclining for a meal, a woman came holding an alabaster flask of very costly perfumed oil of genuine nard. After﻿* breaking the alabaster flask, she poured it﻿* out on his head. 4 But some were expressing indignation to one another: “Why has there been this waste of perfumed oil? 5 For this perfumed oil could have been sold for more than three hundred denarii and given to the poor!” And they began to scold her. 6 But Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Why do you cause trouble for her? She has done a good deed to me. 7 For the poor you always have with you, and you can do good for them whenever you want, but you do not always have me. 8 She has done what she could; ⌊she has anointed my body beforehand⌋ for burial. 9 And truly I say to you, wherever the gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her. 
Judas Arranges to Betray Jesus
10 And Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went to the chief priests in order to betray him to them. 11 And when﻿* they heard this,* they were delighted, and promised to give him money. And he began seeking how he could betray him conveniently. 
Jesus’ Final Passover with the Disciples
12 And on the first day of the feast of Unleavened Bread, when they sacrificed the Passover lamb, his disciples said to him, “Where do you want us to go and﻿* prepare, so that you can eat the Passover?” 13 And he sent two of his disciples and said to them, “Go into the city and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him, 14 and wherever he enters, say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is my guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?” ’ 15 And he will show you a large upstairs room furnished and﻿* ready, and prepare for us there.” 16 And the disciples went out and came into the city and found everything﻿* just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover. 
17 And when it﻿* was evening, he arrived with the twelve. 18 And while﻿* they were reclining at table and eating, Jesus said, “Truly I say to you, that one of you who is eating with me will betray me.” 19 They began to be distressed and to say to him one by one, “Surely not I?” 20 But he said to them, “It is one of the twelve—the one who is dipping bread﻿* into the bowl with me. 21 For the Son of Man is going just as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for him if that man had not been born.” 
The Lord’s Supper
22 And while﻿* they were eating, he took bread and,* after﻿* giving thanks, he broke it﻿* and gave it﻿* to them and said, “Take it,* this is my body.” 23 And after﻿* taking the cup and﻿* giving thanks, he gave it﻿* to them, and they all drank from it. 24 And he said to them, “This is my blood of the covenant which is poured out for many. 25 Truly I say to you that I will never drink of the fruit of the vine any longer until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.” 26 And after they﻿* had sung the hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. 
Jesus Predicts Peter’s Denial
27 And Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away, because it is written, 
‘I will strike the shepherd 
and the sheep will be scattered.’ 
28 But after I am raised, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.” 29 But Peter said to him, “Even if they all fall away, certainly I will not!” 30 And Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to you that today—this night—before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times!” 31 But he kept saying emphatically, “If it is necessary for me to die with you, I will never deny you!” And they all were saying the same thing also. 
The Prayer in Gethsemane
32 And they came to a place ⌊named⌋ Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.” 33 And he took along Peter and James and John with him, and he began to be distressed and troubled. 34 And he said to them, “My soul is deeply grieved, to the point of death. Remain here and stay awake.” 35 And going forward a little he fell to the ground and began to pray that, if it were possible, the hour would pass from him. 36 And he said, “Abba, Father, all things are possible for you! Take away this cup from me! Yet not what I will, but what you will.”* 37 And he came and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter, “Simon, are you sleeping? Were you not able to stay awake one hour? 38 Stay awake and pray that you will not enter into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak!” 39 And again he went away and﻿* prayed, saying the same thing. 40 And again he came and﻿* found them sleeping, ⌊for they could not keep their eyes open⌋, and they did not know what to reply to him. 41 And he came the third time and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? It is enough! The hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of sinners. 42 Get up, let us go! Behold, the one who is betraying me is approaching!” 
The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus
43 And immediately, while﻿* he was still speaking, Judas—one of the twelve—arrived, and with him a crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders. 44 Now the one who was betraying him had given them a sign, saying, “The one whom I kiss—he is the one.* Arrest him and lead him﻿* away under guard!” 45 And when he﻿* arrived, he came up to him immediately and﻿* said, “Rabbi,” and kissed him. 46 So they laid hands on him and arrested him. 
47 But a certain one of the bystanders, drawing his sword, struck the slave of the high priest and cut off his ear. 48 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Have you come out with swords and clubs, as against a robber, to arrest me? 49 Every day I was with you in the temple courts﻿* teaching, and you did not arrest me! But this has happened in order that the scriptures would be fulfilled. 50 And they all abandoned him and﻿* fled. 
51 And a certain young man was following him, clothed only in a linen cloth on his naked body. And they attempted to seize﻿* him, 52 but he left behind the linen cloth and﻿* fled naked. 
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin
53 And they led Jesus away to the high priest, and all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes came together. 54 And Peter followed him from a distance, right inside, into the courtyard of the high priest. And he was sitting with the officers and warming himself by the fire. 55 Now the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death, and they did not find it.* 56 For many gave false testimony against him, and their testimony was not consistent. 57 And some stood up and﻿* began to give false testimony against him, saying, 58 “We heard him saying, ‘I will destroy this temple made by hands, and within three days I will build another not made by hands.” 59 And their testimony was not even consistent about this. 60 And the high priest stood up in the midst of them and﻿* asked Jesus, saying, “Do you not reply anything? What are these people testifying against you?” 61 But he was silent and did not reply anything. Again the high priest asked him and said to him, “Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?” 62 And Jesus said, “I am, and you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Power and coming with the clouds of heaven.” 63 And the high priest tore his clothes and﻿* said, “What further need do we have of witnesses? 64 You have heard the blasphemy! What ⌊do you think⌋?” And they all condemned him ⌊as deserving death⌋. 65 And some began to spit on him and to cover his face and to strike him with their fists, and to say to him “Prophesy!” And the officers received him with slaps in the face. 
Peter Denies Jesus Three Times
66 And while﻿* Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the female slaves of the high priest came up 67 And when﻿* she saw Peter warming himself, she looked intently at him and﻿* said, “You also were with the Nazarene, Jesus.” 68 But he denied it,* saying, “I neither know nor understand what you mean!” And he went out into the gateway, and a rooster crowed. 69 And the female slave, when she﻿* saw him, began to say again to the bystanders, “This man is one of them!” 70 But he denied it﻿* again. And after a little while, again the bystanders began to say to Peter, “You really are one of them, because you also are a Galilean, and your accent ⌊shows it⌋!”  71 And he began to curse and to swear with an oath, “I do not know this man whom you are talking about!” 72 And immediately a rooster crowed for the second time. And Peter remembered the statement, how Jesus had said to him, “Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times,” and throwing himself down, he began to weep. 
Jesus Taken to Pilate
15 And as soon as morning came, after﻿* formulating a plan, the chief priests, with the elders and scribes and the whole Sanhedrin, tied up Jesus, led him﻿* away, and handed him﻿* over to Pilate. 2 And Pilate asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” And he answered him and﻿* said, “You say so.” 3 And the chief priests began to accuse him of many things. 4 So Pilate asked him again, saying, “Do you not answer anything? See how many charges﻿* they are bringing against you!” 5 But Jesus did not answer anything further, so that Pilate was astonished. 
Pilate Releases Barabbas
6 Now at each feast he customarily released for them one prisoner whom they requested. 7 And the one named Barabbas was imprisoned with the rebels who had committed murder in the rebellion. 8 And the crowd came up and﻿* began to ask him to do as he customarily did for them. 9 So Pilate answered them, saying, “Do you want me to release for you the king of the Jews?” 10 (For he realized that the chief priests had handed him over because of envy.) 11 But the chief priests incited the crowd so that he would release for them Barabbas﻿* instead. 12 So Pilate answered and said to them again, “Then what do you want me to do with the one whom you call the king of the Jews?” 13 And they shouted again, “Crucify him!” 14 And Pilate said to them, “Why? What evil has he done?” But they shouted even louder, “Crucify him!” 
15 So Pilate, because he﻿* wanted ⌊to satisfy⌋ the crowd, released for them Barabbas. And after﻿* he had Jesus flogged, he handed him﻿* over so that he could be crucified. 
Jesus Is Mocked
16 So the soldiers led him away into the palace (that is, the governor’s residence) and called together the whole cohort. 17 And they put a purple cloak on him, and after﻿* weaving a crown of thorns they placed it﻿* on him. 18 And they began to greet him, “Hail, king of the Jews!” 19 And they repeatedly struck him on the head with a reed, and were spitting on him, and ⌊they knelt down⌋ and﻿* did obeisance to him. 20 And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of the purple cloak and put his own clothes on him, and they led him out so that they could crucify him. 
Jesus Is Crucified
21 And they forced a certain man who was passing by, Simon of Cyrene (the father of Alexander and Rufus), who was coming from the country, to carry his cross. 22 And they brought him to the place Golgotha (which is translated “Place of a Skull”). 23 And they attempted to give﻿* him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it. 24 And they crucified him and divided his clothes among themselves﻿* by﻿* casting lots for them to see who should take what. 25 Now it was the third hour when they crucified him. 26 And the inscription of the charge against him was written, “The king of the Jews.” 27 And with him they crucified two robbers, one on his right and one on his left. 29 And those who passed by reviled him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! The one who would destroy the temple and rebuild it﻿* in three days, 30 save yourself by﻿* coming down from the cross!” 31 In the same way also the chief priests, along with the scribes, were mocking him﻿* to one another, saying, “He saved others; he is not able to save himself! 32 Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down now from the cross, so that we may see and believe! Even those who were crucified with him were reviling him. 
Jesus Dies on the Cross
33 And when﻿* the sixth hour came, darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour. 34 And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?” (which is translated, “My God, my God, ⌊why⌋ have you forsaken me?”) 35 And some of the bystanders, when they﻿* heard it,* said, “Behold, he is summoning Elijah!” 36 And someone ran and filled a sponge with sour wine, put it﻿* on a reed, and﻿* gave it﻿* to him to drink, saying, “Leave him﻿* alone! Let us see if Elijah is coming to take him down.” 37 But Jesus uttered a loud cry and﻿* expired. 38 And the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. 39 And when﻿* the centurion who was standing opposite him saw that he expired like this, he said, “Truly this man was God’s Son!” 40 And there were also women observing from a distance, among whom were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the younger and Joses, and Salome, 41 who used to follow him and serve him when he was in Galilee, and many other women who went up with him to Jerusalem. 
Jesus Is Buried
42 And when it﻿* was already evening, since it was the day of preparation (that is, the day before the Sabbath), 43 Joseph of Arimathea, a prominent member of the council who was also himself looking forward to the kingdom of God, came acting courageously and﻿* went in to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. 44 And Pilate was surprised that he was already dead, and summoning the centurion, asked him whether he had died already. 45 And when he﻿* learned of it﻿* from the centurion, he granted the corpse to Joseph. 46 And after﻿* purchasing a linen cloth and﻿* taking him down, he wrapped him﻿* in the linen cloth and placed him in a tomb that had been cut from the rock. And he rolled a stone over the entrance of the tomb. 47 Now Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was placed. 
Jesus Is Raised
16 And when﻿* the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome purchased fragrant spices so that they could go and﻿* anoint him. 2 And very early in the morning on the first day of the week they came to the tomb after﻿* the sun had risen. 3 And they were saying to one another, “Who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance of the tomb?” 4 And when they﻿* looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled away (for it was very large). 5 And as they﻿* were going into the tomb, they saw a young man dressed in a white robe sitting on the right side, and they were alarmed. 6 But he said to them, “Do not be alarmed. You are looking for Jesus the Nazarene who was crucified. He has been raised, he is not here! See the place where they laid him! 7 But go, tell his disciples and Peter that he is going ahead of you to Galilee. You will see him there, just as he told you.” 8 And they went out and﻿* fled from the tomb, because trembling and amazement had seized them. And they said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid. 
The Shorter Ending of Mark
⟦So they promptly reported all the things they had been commanded to those around Peter. And after these things, Jesus himself also sent out through them from the east even as far as the west the holy and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation. Amen.⟧ 
The Longer Ending of Mark
⟦9 Now early on the first day of the week, after he﻿* rose, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had expelled seven demons. 10 She went out and﻿* announced it﻿* to those who were with him while they﻿* were mourning and weeping. 11 And those, when they﻿* heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, refused to believe it.* 12 And after these things, he appeared in a different form to two of them as they﻿* were walking, while they﻿* were going out into the countryside. 13 And these went and﻿* reported it﻿* to the others, and they did not believe them. 14 And later, while﻿* they were reclining at table, he appeared to the eleven. And he reprimanded their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they did not believe those who had seen him after he﻿* had been raised. 15 And he said to them, “Go into all the world and﻿* preach the gospel to all creation. 16 The one who believes and is baptized will be saved, but the one who refuses to believe will be condemned. 17 And these signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will expel demons, they will speak in new tongues, 18 they will pick up snakes. And if they drink any deadly poison it will never hurt them; they will lay hands on the sick and ⌊they will get⌋ well.” 
19 Then the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God. 20 And they went out and﻿* proclaimed everywhere, while﻿* the Lord was working together with them﻿* and confirming the message through the accompanying signs.⟧

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE
 
The Preface to Luke’s Gospel
1 Since many have attempted to compile an account concerning the events that have been fulfilled among us, 2 just as those who were eyewitnesses and servants of the word from the beginning passed on to us, 3 it seemed best to me also—because I﻿* have followed all things carefully from the beginning—to write them﻿* down in orderly sequence for you, most excellent Theophilus, 4 so that you may know the certainty concerning the things about which you were taught. 
The Prediction of John the Baptist’s Birth
5 It happened that in the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a certain priest, Zechariah by name, of the division of Abijah. And ⌊he had a wife⌋ from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 6 And they were both righteous in the sight of God, living blamelessly in all the commandments and regulations of the Lord. 7 And ⌊they did not have⌋ a child, because Elizabeth was barren. And they were both advanced ⌊in years⌋. 
8 And it happened that while﻿* he was serving as priest before God in the order of his division, 9 according to the custom of the priesthood he was chosen by lot to enter into the temple of the Lord to burn incense. 10 And the whole crowd of the people were praying outside at the hour of the incense offering. 11 And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense. 12 And Zechariah was terrified when he﻿* saw the angel,* and fear fell upon him. 13 But the angel said to him, 
“Do not be afraid, Zechariah, 
because your prayer has been heard, 
and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, 
and you will call his name John. 
14 And ⌊you will experience joy and exultation⌋, 
and many will rejoice at his birth. 
15 For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, 
and he must never drink wine or beer, 
and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit 
while he is﻿* still in his mother’s womb. 
16 And he will turn many of the sons of Israel 
to the Lord their God. 
17 And he will go on before him 
in the spirit and power of Elijah, 
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, 
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous, 
to prepare for the Lord a people made ready.” 
18 And Zechariah said to the angel, “By what will I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced ⌊in years⌋!” 19 And the angel answered and﻿* said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God, and I was sent to speak to you and to announce to you this good news. 20 And behold, you will be silent and not able to speak until the day these things take place, ⌊because⌋ you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time.” 
21 And the people were waiting for Zechariah, and began to wonder﻿* when﻿* he was delayed in the temple. 22 And when he﻿* came out he was not able to speak to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he kept making signs to them, and remained unable to speak. 23 And it happened that when the days of his service came to an end, he went away to his home. 
24 Now after these days, his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she kept herself in seclusion for five months, saying, 25 “Thus the Lord has done for me in the days in which he has concerned himself with me,* to take away my disgrace among people.” 
The Prediction of Jesus’ Birth
26 Now in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town of Galilee ⌊named⌋ Nazareth, 27 to a virgin legally promised in marriage to a man ⌊named⌋ Joseph of the house of David. And the name of the virgin was Mary. 28 And he came to her and﻿* said, “Greetings, favored one! The Lord is with you.” 29 But she was greatly perplexed at the statement, and was pondering what sort of greeting this might be. 30 And the angel said to her, 
“Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. 
31 And behold, you will conceive in the womb and will give birth to a son, 
and you will call his name Jesus. 
32 This one will be great, and he will be called the Son of the Most High, 
and the Lord God will give him the throne of his father David. 
33 And he will reign over the house of Jacob ⌊forever⌋, 
and of his kingdom there will be no end. 
34 And Mary said to the angel, “How will this be, since I have not had sexual relations with a man?” 35 And the angel answered and﻿* said to her, 
“The Holy Spirit will come upon you, 
and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. 
Therefore also the one to be born will be called holy, the Son of God. 
36 And behold, your relative Elizabeth—she also has conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren. 37 For ⌊nothing will be impossible with God⌋.” 
38 So Mary said, “Behold, the Lord’s female slave! May it happen to me according to your word.” And the angel departed from her. 
Mary Visits Elizabeth
39 Now in those days Mary set out and﻿* traveled with haste into the hill country, to a town of Judah, 40 and entered into the house of Zechariah, and greeted Elizabeth. 41 And it happened that when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the baby in her womb leaped and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit. 42 And she cried out with a loud shout and said, 
“Blessed are you among women, 
and blessed is the fruit of your womb! 
43 And why is this granted to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? 44 For behold, when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy! 45 And blessed is she who believed that there will be a fulfillment to what was spoken to her from the Lord!” 
Mary’s Hymn of Praise to God
46 And Mary said, 
“My soul exalts the Lord, 
47 and my spirit has rejoiced greatly in God my Savior, 
48 because he has looked upon the humble state of his female slave, 
for behold, from now on all generations will consider me blessed, 
49 because the Mighty One has done great things for me, 
and holy is his name. 
50 And his mercy is for generation after generation 
to those who fear him. 
51 He has done a mighty deed with his arm; 
he has dispersed the proud in the thoughts of their hearts. 
52 He has brought down rulers from their thrones, 
and has exalted the lowly. 
53 He has filled those who are hungry with good things, 
and those who are rich he has sent away empty-handed. 
54 He has helped Israel his servant, 
remembering his mercy, 
55 just as he spoke to our fathers, 
to Abraham and to his descendants ⌊forever⌋.” 
56 And Mary stayed with her about three months, and returned to her home. 
The Birth of John the Baptist
57 Now the time came for Elizabeth that she should give birth, and she gave birth to a son. 58 And her neighbors and relatives heard that ⌊the Lord had shown his great mercy to her⌋, and they rejoiced with her. 59 And it happened that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were wanting to name him ⌊after⌋ his father Zechariah. 60 And his mother answered and﻿* said, “No, but he will be named John.” 61 And they said to her, “There is no one of your relatives who is called by this name.” 62 So they made signs to his father asking what he wanted him to be named, 63 and he asked for a writing tablet and﻿* wrote, saying, “John is his name.” And they were all astonished. 64 And his mouth and his tongue were opened immediately, and he began to speak,* praising God. 65 And fear came on all those who lived near them, and in all the hill country of Judea all these events were discussed. 66 And all those who heard kept these things﻿* in their hearts, saying, “What then will this child be? For indeed the hand of the Lord was with him!” 
The Praise and Prophecy of Zechariah
67 And his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied, saying, 
68 “Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, 
because he has visited to help and ⌊has redeemed⌋ his people, 
69 and has raised up a horn of salvation for us 
in the house of his servant David, 
70 just as he spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets from earliest times— 
71 salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all those who hate us, 
72 to show mercy to our fathers 
and to remember his holy covenant, 
73 the oath that he swore to Abraham our father, 
to grant us 74 that we, being rescued from the hand of our enemies, 
could serve him without fear 75 in holiness and righteousness 
before him all our days. 
76 And so you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High, 
for you will go on before the Lord to prepare his ways, 
77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people 
by the forgiveness of their sins, 
78 because of the merciful compassion of our God 
by which the dawn will visit to help us from on high, 
79 to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, 
to direct our feet into the way of peace.” 
80 And the child kept growing and becoming strong in spirit, and was in the wilderness until the day of his public appearance to Israel. 
The Birth of Jesus Christ
2 Now it happened that in those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus to register all the empire. 2 (This first registration took place when﻿* Quirinius was governor of Syria.) 3 And everyone went to be registered, each one to his own town. 4 So Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the town of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family line of David, 5 to be registered together with Mary, who was legally promised in marriage to him and﻿* was pregnant. 6 And it happened that while they were there, ⌊the time came⌋ for her to give birth. 7 And she gave birth to her firstborn son, and wrapped him in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn. 
The Shepherds and the Angels
8 And there were shepherds in the same region, living out of doors and keeping watch, guarding over their flock by night. 9 And an angel of the Lord stood near them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and ⌊they were terribly frightened⌋. 10 And the angel said to them, “Do not be afraid, for behold, I bring good news to you of great joy which will be for all the people: 11 that today a Savior, who is Christ the Lord, was born for you in the city of David. 12 And this will be the sign for you: you will find the baby wrapped in strips of cloth and lying in a manger.” 13 And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying, 
14 “Glory to God in the highest, 
and on earth peace 
among people ⌊with whom he is pleased⌋!” 
15 And it happened that when the angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds began to say﻿* to one another, “Let us go now to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has revealed to us!” 16 And they went hurrying and found both Mary and Joseph, and the baby who was lying in the manger. 17 And when they﻿* saw it,* they made known the statement that had been told to them about this child. 18 And all who heard it﻿* were astonished concerning what had been said to them by the shepherds. 19 But Mary treasured up all these words, pondering them﻿* in her heart. 20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and seen, just as it had been told to them. 
21 And when eight days were completed ⌊so that he could be circumcised⌋, he was named Jesus, his name that he was called by the angel before he was conceived in the womb. 
The Presentation of Jesus at the Temple
22 And when the days of their purification were completed according to the law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him﻿* to the Lord 23 (just as it is written in the law of the Lord, “Every male that opens the womb will be called holy to the Lord”) 24 and to offer a sacrifice according to what was stated in the law of the Lord, “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.” 
The Prophecy of Simeon
25 And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem ⌊whose name was⌋ Simeon, and this man was righteous and devout, looking forward to the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him. 26 And it had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death before he would see the Lord’s Christ. 27 And he came in the Spirit into the temple, and when the parents brought in the child Jesus so that they could do for him according to what was customary under the law, 28 he took him in his arms and praised God and said, 
29 “Now dismiss your slave in peace, Lord, 
according to your word. 
30 For my eyes have seen your salvation 
31 that you have prepared in the presence of all the peoples, 
32 a light for revelation to the Gentiles, 
and glory to your people Israel.” 
33 And his father and mother were astonished at what was said about him. 34 And Simeon blessed them and said to his mother Mary, “Behold, this child is appointed for the fall and rise of many in Israel, and for a sign that is opposed—35 and a sword will pierce your own soul also, so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed!” 
The Testimony of Anna
36 And there was a prophetess, Anna the daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Asher (she was advanced ⌊in years⌋, having lived with her husband seven years ⌊after her marriage⌋, 37 and herself as a widow up to eighty-four years) who did not depart from the temple with fastings and prayers, serving night and day. 38 And at that same hour she approached and﻿* began to give thanks to God, and to speak about him to all those who were waiting for the redemption of Jerusalem. 
39 And when they had completed everything according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth. 40 And the child was growing and becoming strong, filled with wisdom, and the favor of God was upon him. 
Jesus in the Temple at Twelve Years Old
41 And his parents went every year to Jerusalem for the feast of the Passover. 42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up according to the custom of the feast. 43 And after﻿* the days were completed, while they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. And his parents did not know it,* 44 but believing him to be in the group of travelers, they went a day’s journey. And they began searching for﻿* him among their relatives and their acquaintances, 45 and when they﻿* did not find him,* they returned to Jerusalem to search for him. 46 And it happened that after three days they found him in the temple courts,* sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and asking them questions. 47 And all who heard him were amazed at his insight and his﻿* answers. 48 And when they﻿* saw him, they were astounded and his mother said to him, “Child, why have you done this to us? Look, your father and I have been searching for you anxiously!” 49 And he said to them, “⌊Why⌋ were you searching for me? Did you not know that it was necessary for me to be in the house of my Father?” 50 And they did not understand the statement that he spoke to them. 51 And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was submitting to them. And his mother treasured all these things in her heart. 
52 And Jesus was advancing in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and with people. 
John the Baptist Begins His Ministry
3 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip was tetrarch of the region of Iturea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene, 2 in the time of the high priest Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the wilderness. 3 And he went into all the surrounding region of the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins, 4 as it is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah, 
“The voice of one crying out in the wilderness, 
‘Prepare the way of the Lord, 
make his paths straight! 
5 Every valley will be filled, 
and every mountain and hill will be leveled, 
and the crooked will become straight, 
and the rough road will become﻿* smooth, 
6 and all flesh will see the salvation of God.’ ” 
7 Therefore he was saying to the crowds that came out to be baptized by him, “Offspring of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath? 8 Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance! And do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones! 9 And even now the ax is positioned at the root of the trees; therefore every tree not producing good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.” 
10 And the crowds were asking him, saying, “What then should we do?” 11 And he answered and﻿* said to them, “The one who has two tunics must share with the one who does not have one,* and the one who has food must do likewise.” 12 And tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, “Teacher, what should we do?” 13 And he said to them, “Collect no more than ⌊what you are ordered to⌋.” 14 And those who served in the army were also asking him, saying, “What should we also do?” And he said to them, “Extort from no one, and do not blackmail anyone,* and be content with your pay.” 
15 And while﻿* the people were waiting expectantly and all were pondering in their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he might be the Christ, 16 John answered them all, saying, “I baptize you with water, but the one who is more powerful than I am is coming, of whom I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. 17 His winnowing shovel is in his hand, to clean out his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his storehouse, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.” 
18 So with many other exhortations also he proclaimed good news to the people. 19 But Herod the tetrarch, who had been reproved by him concerning Herodias, his brother’s wife, and concerning all the evil deeds that Herod had done, 20 added this also to them all: he also locked up John in prison. 
The Baptism of Jesus
21 Now it happened that when all the people were baptized, Jesus also was baptized, and while he﻿* was praying, heaven was opened, 22 and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove, and a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.” 
The Genealogy of Jesus Christ
23 And Jesus, when he﻿* began his ministry,* was himself about thirty years old, being the son (as it was believed) of Joseph the son of Eli, 24 the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph, 25 the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai, 26 the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda, 27 the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri, 28 the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er, 29 the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, 30 the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim, 31 the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David, 32 the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon, 33 the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 34 the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, 35 the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah, 36 the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, 37 the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, 38 the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God. 
The Temptation of Jesus
4 And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness 2 forty days, being tempted by the devil. And he ate nothing during those days, and when﻿* they were completed, he was hungry. 3 So the devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, order this stone that it become bread!” 4 And Jesus replied to him, “It is written, ‘Man will not live on bread alone.’ ” 
5 And he led him up and﻿* showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 6 And the devil said to him, “I will give you all this domain and their glory, because it has been handed over to me, and I can give it to whomever I want. 7 So if you will worship before me, all this will be yours.” 8 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to him, “It is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and serve only him.’ ” 
9 And he brought him to Jerusalem, and had him stand on the highest point of the temple and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here, 10 for it is written, 
‘He will command his angels concerning you, 
to protect you,’ 
11 and 
‘on their hands they will lift you up, 
lest you strike your foot against a stone.’ ” 
12 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to him, “It is said, ‘You are not to put to the test the Lord your God.’ ” 13 And when﻿* the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from him until a favorable time. 
Public Ministry in Galilee
14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and news about him went out throughout all the surrounding region. 15 And he began to teach﻿* in their synagogues, and﻿* was praised by all. 
Rejected at Nazareth
16 And he came to Nazareth, where ⌊he had been brought up⌋, and according to ⌊his custom⌋ he entered into the synagogue on the day of the Sabbath and stood up to read. 17 And the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was given to him, and unrolling the scroll he found the place where it was written, 
18 “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, 
because of which he has anointed me 
to proclaim good news to the poor. 
He has sent me 
to proclaim release to the captives, 
and recovery of sight to the blind, 
to send out in freedom those who are oppressed, 
19 to proclaim the favorable year of the Lord.” 
20 And he rolled up the scroll and﻿* gave it﻿* back to the attendant and﻿* sat down. And the eyes of everyone in the synagogue were looking intently at him. 21 And he began to say to them, “Today this scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.” 22 And they were all speaking well of him, and were astonished at the gracious words that were coming out of his mouth. And they were saying, “Is this man not the son of Joseph?” 23 And he said to them, “Doubtless you will tell me this parable: ‘Physician, heal yourself!’ Whatever we have heard that took place in Capernaum, do here in your hometown also!” 24 And he said, “Truly I say to you that no prophet is acceptable in his own hometown. 25 But in truth I say to you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut for three years and six months while a great famine took place over all the land. 26 And Elijah was sent to none of them, but only to Zarephath in the region of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow. 27 And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, and none of them was made clean except Naaman the Syrian.” 28 And all those in the synagogue were filled with anger when they﻿* heard these things. 29 And they stood up and﻿* forced him out of the town and brought him up to the edge of the hill on which their town was built, so that they could throw him down the cliff. 30 But he passed through their midst and﻿* went on his way. 
Jesus Teaches and Heals Many in Capernaum
31 And he came down to Capernaum, a town of Galilee, and was teaching them on the Sabbath. 32 And they were astounded at his teaching, because ⌊he spoke⌋ with authority. 
33 And in the synagogue there was a man who had the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice, 34 “Ha! ⌊Leave us alone⌋, Jesus the Nazarene! Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!” 35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent and come out of him!” And after﻿* throwing him down in their midst, the demon came out of him without hurting him at all. 36 And amazement came upon them all, and they began to talk﻿* with one another, saying, “What word is this? For he commands the unclean spirits with authority and power, and they come out!” 37 And news about him went out into every place of the surrounding region. 
38 And after he﻿* set out from the synagogue, he went into Simon’s house. And Simon’s mother-in-law was afflicted with a high fever, and they asked him on behalf of her. 39 And he stood over her and﻿* rebuked the fever, and it left her. And immediately she got up and﻿* began to serve﻿* them. 
40 Now as﻿* the sun was setting, all who had those who were sick with various diseases brought them to him, and placing his﻿* hands on every one of them, he healed them. 41 And demons also were coming out of many, crying out and saying, “You are the Son of God!” And he rebuked them﻿* and did not permit them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ. 
42 And when it﻿* was day, he departed and﻿* went to an isolated place. And the crowds were seeking him, and came to him and were trying to prevent him from departing from them. 43 But he said to them, “It is necessary for me to proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns also, because I was sent for this purpose. 44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of Judea. 
Jesus Calls His First Disciples
5 Now it happened that while the crowd was pressing around him and hearing the word of God, he was standing beside the lake of Gennesaret, 2 and he saw two boats there beside the lake, but the fishermen had gotten out of them and﻿* were washing their nets. 3 And he got into one of the boats, which was Simon’s, and﻿* asked him to put out from the land a little. And he sat down and﻿* began to teach﻿* the crowds from the boat. 4 And when he stopped speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into the deep water and let down your nets for a catch.” 5 And Simon answered and﻿* said, “Master, although we﻿* worked hard through the whole night, we caught nothing. But at your word I will let down the nets.” 6 And when they﻿* did this, they caught a very large number of fish, and their nets began to tear.* 7 And they signaled to their partners in the other boat to come and﻿* help them, and they came and filled both the boats so that they began to sink. 8 And when he﻿* saw it,* Simon Peter fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, “Depart from me, Lord, because I am ⌊a sinful man⌋!” 9 For amazement had seized him and all those who were with him at the catch of fish that they had caught, 10 and so also were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were business partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid! From now on you will be catching people!” 11 And after they﻿* brought their boats to the land, they left everything and﻿* followed him. 
A Leper Cleansed
12 And it happened that while he was in one of the towns, ⌊there was⌋ a man ⌊covered with leprosy⌋. And when he﻿* saw Jesus, he fell down on his face and﻿* begged him, saying, “Lord, if you are willing, you are able to make me clean.” 13 And extending his hand he touched him, saying, “I am willing; be clean.” And immediately the leprosy went away from him. 14 And he ordered him, “Tell no one, but go and﻿* show yourself to the priest and bring the offering﻿* for your cleansing just as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. 15 But the report about him spread even more, and large crowds were gathering to hear him﻿* and to be healed of their illnesses. 16 But he himself was withdrawing in the wilderness and praying. 
A Paralytic Healed
17 And it happened that on one of the days as he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there who ⌊had come⌋ from every village of Galilee and Judea and from Jerusalem, and the power of the Lord was there in order for him to heal. 18 And behold, men came carrying on a stretcher a man who was paralyzed, and they were seeking to bring him in and place him﻿ before him. 19 And when they﻿* did not find a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and﻿* let him down through the roof tiles with the stretcher into the midst of them, in front of Jesus. 20 And when he﻿* saw their faith, he said, “Friend, your sins are forgiven you.” 21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, “Who is this man who speaks blasphemies? Who is able to forgive sins except God alone?” 22 But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered and﻿* said to them, “Why are you reasoning in your hearts? 23 Which is easier to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk?’ 24 But in order that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins,” he said to the one who was paralyzed, “I say to you, ‘Get up and pick up your stretcher and﻿* go to your home.’ ” 25 And immediately he stood up before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and﻿* went away to his home, glorifying God. 26 And amazement seized them all, and they began to glorify﻿* God. And they were filled with fear, saying, “We have seen wonderful things today!” 
Levi Called to Follow Jesus
27 And after these things, he went out and saw a tax collector ⌊named⌋ Levi sitting at the tax booth, and he said to him, “Follow me!” 28 And leaving everything behind, he got up and﻿* began to follow﻿* him. 
29 And Levi gave a great banquet for him in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were reclining for the meal with them. 30 And the Pharisees and their scribes began to complain﻿* to his disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?” 31 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Those who are healthy do not have need of a physician, but those ⌊who are sick⌋. 32 I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.” 
On Fasting
33 And they said to him, “The disciples of John fast often and make prayers—likewise also the disciples﻿* of the Pharisees—but yours are eating and drinking!” 34 So he﻿* said to them, “You are not able to make the ⌊bridegroom’s attendants⌋ fast as long as the bridegroom is with them, are you?* 35 But days will come, and when the bridegroom is taken away from them, then they will fast in those days.” 36 And he also told a parable to them: “No one tears a patch from a new garment and﻿* puts it﻿* on an old garment. Otherwise, he will have torn the new also, and the old will not match the patch that is from the new. 37 And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the new wine will burst the wineskins, and it will be spilled and the wineskins will be destroyed. 38 But new wine must be put into new wineskins. 39 And no one after﻿* drinking old wine﻿* wants new, because he says, ‘The old is just fine!’ ” 
Plucking Grain on the Sabbath
6 Now it happened that on a Sabbath he went through the grain fields, and his disciples were picking and eating the heads of grain, rubbing them﻿* in their﻿* hands. 2 But some of the Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is not permitted on the Sabbath? 3 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to them, “Have you not read this, what David did when he and those who were with him were hungry—4 how he entered into the house of God and took the bread of the presentation, which it is not permitted to eat (except the priests alone), and﻿* ate it﻿* and gave it﻿* to those with him?” 5 And he said to them, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.” 
A Man with a Withered Hand Healed
6 Now it happened that on another Sabbath he entered into the synagogue and was teaching, and a man was there, and his right hand was withered. 7 So the scribes and the Pharisees were watching closely to see if he would heal on the Sabbath, in order that they could find a reason﻿* to accuse him. 8 But he knew their thoughts and said to the man who had the withered hand, “Get up and stand in the middle,” and he got up and﻿* stood there. 9 And Jesus said to them, “I ask you whether it is permitted on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save a life or to destroy it?”* 10 And after﻿* looking around at them all, he said to him, “Stretch out your hand,” and he did, and his hand was restored. 11 But they were filled with fury, and began discussing﻿* with one another what they might do to Jesus. 
The Selection of the Twelve Apostles
12 Now it happened that in these days he went away to the mountain to pray, and was spending the whole night in prayer to God. 13 And when day came, he summoned his disciples and chose from them twelve, whom he also named apostles: 14 Simon (whom he also named Peter) and his brother Andrew, and James, and John, and Philip, and Bartholomew, 15 and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon who was called the Zealot, 16 and Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor. 
The Sermon on the Plain: The Beatitudes
17 And he came down with them and﻿* stood on a level place, and a large crowd of his disciples and a great multitude of people from all of Judea and Jerusalem and the seacoast district of Tyre and Sidon, 18 who came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases, and those who were troubled by unclean spirits were cured. 19 And the whole crowd was seeking to touch him, because power was going out from him and healing them all. 
20 And he lifted up his eyes to his disciples and﻿* said, 
“Blessed are the poor, 
because yours is the kingdom of God. 
21 Blessed are those who are hungry now, 
because you will be satisfied. 
Blessed are those who weep now, 
Because you will laugh. 
22 Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude you and revile you and spurn your name as evil on account of the Son of Man. 23 Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven. For their fathers used to do the same things to the prophets. 
The Sermon on the Plain: Woes
24 “But woe to you who are rich, 
because you have received your comfort. 
25 Woe to you who are satisfied now, 
because you will be hungry. 
Woe, you who laugh now, 
because you will mourn and weep. 
26 Woe whenever all people speak well of you, 
for their fathers used to do the same things to the false prophets. 
The Sermon on the Plain: Love for Enemies
27 “But to you who are listening I say: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, 28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you. 29 To the one who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also, and from the one who takes away your cloak, do not withhold your tunic also. 30 Give to everyone who asks you, and from the one who takes away your things, do not ask for them back.* 31 And just as you want people ⌊to do⌋ to you, do ⌊the same⌋ to them. 
32 “And if you love those who love you, what kind of credit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them! 33 And if you do good to those who do good to you, what kind of credit is that to you? Even the sinners do the same! 34 And if you lend to those from whom you expect to receive back, what kind of credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, so that they may get back an equal amount! 35 But love your enemies, and do good, and lend expecting back nothing, and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, because he is kind to the ungrateful and wicked. 36 Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful! 
The Sermon on the Plain: On Judging Others
37 “And do not judge, and you will never be judged. And do not condemn, and you will never be condemned. Pardon, and you will be pardoned. 38 Give, and it will be given to you, a good measure—pressed down, shaken, overflowing—they will pour out into your lap. For with the measure by which you measure out, it will be measured out to you in return.” 
39 And he also told them a parable: “Surely a blind person cannot lead the blind, can he?* Will they not both fall into a pit? 40 A disciple is not superior to his﻿* teacher, but everyone, when he﻿* is fully trained, will be like his teacher. 41 And why do you see the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but do not notice the beam of wood that is in your own eye? 42 How are you able to say to your brother, “Brother, allow me to remove the speck that is in your eye,” while﻿* you yourself do not see the beam of wood in your own eye? Hypocrite! First remove the beam of wood from your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck that is in your brother’s eye! 
The Sermon on the Plain: Trees and Their Fruit
43 “For there is no good tree that produces bad fruit, nor on the other hand a bad tree that produces good fruit, 44 for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thorn plants, nor are grapes harvested from thorn bushes. 45 The good person out of the good treasury of his heart brings forth good, and the evil person out of his﻿* evil treasury﻿* brings forth evil. For out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. 
46 “And why do you call me ‘Lord, Lord,’ and do not do what I tell you?* 
The Sermon on the Plain: Two Houses and Two Foundations
47 “Everyone who comes to me and listens to my words and does them—I will show you what he is like: 48 he is like a man building a house, who dug and went down deep and laid the foundation on the rock. And when﻿* a flood came, the river burst against that house and was not able to shake it, because it had been built well. 49 But the one who hears my words﻿* and does not do them﻿* is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation, which the river burst against, and immediately it collapsed—and the collapse of that house was great!” 
A Centurion’s Slave Healed
7 After he had finished all his statements in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum. 2 Now a certain centurion’s slave, who was esteemed by him, ⌊was sick⌋ and﻿* was about to die. 3 So when he﻿* heard about Jesus, he sent Jewish elders to him, asking him that he would come and﻿* cure his slave. 4 And when they﻿* came to Jesus, they began imploring him earnestly, saying, “He is worthy that you grant this for him, 5 because he loves our nation and he himself built the synagogue for us.” 6 So Jesus went with them. Now by this time he was not far away from the house, and﻿* the centurion sent friends, saying to him, “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy that you should come in under my roof. 7 For this reason neither did I consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word and my slave must be healed. 8 For I also am a man placed under authority, who has soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another one, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”* 
9 And when﻿* Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turning around to the crowd that was following him, he said, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith!” 10 And when they﻿* returned to the house, those who had been sent found the slave healthy. 
A Widow’s Son Raised
11 And it happened that on the next day he went to a town called Nain, and his disciples and a large crowd went with him. 12 And as he approached the gate of the town, behold, a man who had died was being carried out, his mother’s only son, and she was a widow. And a large crowd from the town was with her. 13 And when﻿* the Lord saw her, he had compassion for her and said to her, “Do not weep!” 14 And he came up and﻿* touched the bier, and those who were carrying it﻿* stopped. And he said, “Young man, I say to you, get up!” 15 And the dead man sat up and began to speak, and he gave him to his mother. 16 And fear seized them all, and they began to glorify﻿* God, saying, “A great prophet has appeared among us!” and “God has visited to help his people!” 17 And this report about him went out in the whole of Judea and in all the surrounding region. 
A Question from John the Baptist
18 And his disciples reported to John about all these things. And summoning a certain two of his disciples, John 19 sent them﻿* to the Lord, saying, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?” 20 And when﻿* the men came to him, they said, “John the Baptist sent us to you, saying, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?’ ” 21 In that hour he healed many people of diseases and suffering and evil spirits, and he granted sight to many blind people. 22 And he answered and﻿* said to them, “Go and﻿* tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind receive sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear; the dead are raised, the poor have good news announced to them.* 23 And whoever is not offended by me is blessed.” 
24 And when﻿* the messengers of John had departed, he began to speak to the crowds concerning John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 25 But what did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are in splendid clothing and luxury are in the royal palaces. 26 But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and even more than a prophet! 27 It is this man about whom it is written: 
‘Behold, I am sending my messenger before your face, 
who will prepare your way before you.’ 
28 I tell you, there is no one greater among those born of women than John, but the one who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. 29 (And all the people, when they﻿* heard this﻿*—even the tax collectors—affirmed the righteousness of God, because they﻿* had been baptized with the baptism of John, 30 but the Pharisees and the legal experts rejected the purpose of God for themselves, because they﻿* had not been baptized by him.) 
31 “To what then shall I compare the people of this generation, and what are they like? 32 They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling out to one another, who say, 
‘We played the flute for you and you did not dance; 
we sang a lament and you did not weep.’ 
33 For John the Baptist has come not eating bread or drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon!’ 34 The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Behold, a man who is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ 35 And wisdom is vindicated by all her children.” 
A Sinful Woman Anoints Jesus’ Feet
36 Now one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him, and he entered into the house of the Pharisee and﻿* reclined at the table. 37 And behold, a woman in the town who was a sinner, when she﻿* learned that he was dining in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster flask of perfumed oil, 38 and standing behind him at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears and was wiping them﻿* with the hair of her head and was kissing his feet and anointing them﻿* with the perfumed oil. 39 Now when﻿* the Pharisee who invited him saw this,* he spoke to himself, saying, “If this man were a prophet, he would have known who and what kind of woman this is who is touching him, that she is a sinner.” 40 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” And he said, “Teacher, say it.”* 41 “There were two debtors who owed a certain creditor. One owed five hundred denarii and the other fifty. 42 When﻿* they were not able to repay him,* he forgave the debts﻿* of both. Now which of them will love him more?” 43 Simon answered and﻿* said, “I suppose that it is the one to whom he forgave more.” And he said to him, “You have judged correctly.” 44 And turning toward the woman, he said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I entered into your house. You did not give me water for my feet, but she wet my feet with her tears and wiped them﻿* with her hair. 45 You did not give me a kiss, but from the time I entered, she has not stopped kissing my feet. 46 You did not anoint my head with olive oil, but she anointed my feet with perfumed oil. 47 ⌊For this reason⌋ I tell you, her sins—which were many—have been forgiven, for she loved much. But the one to whom little is forgiven loves little.” 48 And he said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.” 49 And those who were reclining at the table with him began to say among themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?” 50 And he said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you. Go in peace.” 
Some Women Accompany Jesus
8 And it happened that ⌊afterward⌋ also he was going about from one town and village to another preaching and proclaiming the good news concerning the kingdom of God, and the twelve were with him, 2 and some women who had been healed of evil spirits and diseases: Mary (who was called Magdalene), from whom seven demons had gone out, 3 and Joanna the wife of Chuza (Herod’s household manager), and Susanna, and many others who were helping to support them from their possessions. 
The Parable of the Sower
4 And while﻿* a large crowd was gathering and they were going to him from town after town, he spoke by means of a parable: 5 “The sower went out to sow his seed, and while he was sowing, ⌊some seed⌋ fell on the side of the path and was trampled under foot, and the birds of the sky devoured it. 6 And other seed fell on the rock, and when it﻿* came up, it withered, because it did not have moisture. 7 And other seed fell in the midst of the thorn plants, and the thorn plants grew up with it﻿* and﻿* choked it. 8 And other seed fell on the good soil, and when it﻿* came up, it produced a hundred times as much grain.” As he﻿* said these things, he called out, “The one who has ears to hear, let him hear!” 
The Reason for the Parables
9 And his disciples asked him what this parable meant. 10 And he said, “To you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the rest they are in parables, so that 
‘Seeing they may not see, 
and hearing they may not understand.’ 
The Parable of the Sower Interpreted
11 Now the parable means this: the seed is the word of God, 12 and those beside the path are the ones who have heard. Then the devil comes and takes away the word from their heart, so that they may not believe and﻿* be saved. 13 And those on the rock are those who receive the word with joy when they hear it,* and these do not have enough root, who believe for a time and in a time of testing fall away. 14 And the seed that fell into the thorn plants—these are the ones who hear and as they﻿* go along are choked by the worries and riches and pleasures of life, and they do not bear fruit to maturity. 15 But the seed on the good soil—these are the ones who, after﻿* hearing the word, hold fast to it﻿* with a noble and good heart, and bear fruit with patient endurance. 
The Parable of the Lamp
16 “And no one, after﻿* lighting a lamp, covers it with a jar or puts it﻿* under a bed, but puts it﻿* on a lampstand, so that those who come in can see the light. 17 For nothing is secret that will not become evident, and nothing hidden that will never be known and come to light. 18 Therefore consider how you listen, for whoever has, to him more will be given, and whoever does not have, even what he thinks that he has will be taken away from him.” 
Jesus’ Mother and Brothers
19 Now his mother and brothers came to him, and they were not able to meet with him because of the crowd. 20 And it was reported to him, “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside wanting to see you.” 21 But he answered and﻿* said to them, “These are my mother and my brothers—the ones who hear the word of God and do it.* 
Calming of a Storm
22 Now it happened that on one of the days both he and his disciples got into a boat, and he said to them, “Let us cross over to the other side of the lake.” And they set sail, 23 and as﻿* they were sailing, he fell asleep. And a storm of wind came down on the lake, and they were being swamped and were in danger. 24 And they came and﻿* woke him up, saying, “Master, master! We are perishing!” So he got up and﻿* rebuked the wind and the billowing waves of water and they ceased, and it became calm. 25 And he said to them, “Where is your faith?” But they were afraid and﻿* were astonished, saying to one another, “Who then is this, that he commands even the winds and the water and they obey him?” 
A Demon-possessed Gerasene Healed
26 And they sailed to the region of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee. 27 And as﻿* he got out on the land, a certain man from the town met him﻿* who had demons and for a considerable time had not worn clothes and did not live in a house, but among the tombs. 28 And when he﻿* saw Jesus, he cried out, fell down before him, and said with a loud voice, “⌊What do I have to do with you⌋, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me!” 29 For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. (For it had seized him many times, and he was bound with chains and shackles and﻿* was guarded, and breaking the bonds he would be driven by the demon into the deserted places.) 30 So Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “Legion,” because many demons had entered into him. 31 And they began imploring﻿* him that he would not order them to depart into the abyss. 32 Now there was a large herd of pigs feeding there on the hill, and they implored him that he would permit them to enter into those pigs. And he permitted them. 33 So the demons came out of the man and﻿* entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed headlong down the steep slope into the lake and were drowned. 34 And when﻿* the herdsmen saw what had happened, they fled and reported it﻿* in the town and in the countryside. 35 So they went out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone out sitting there clothed and in his right mind, at the feet of Jesus, and they were afraid. 36 And those who had seen it﻿* reported to them how the man who had been demon-possessed had been healed. 37 And all the people of the surrounding region of the Gerasenes asked him to depart from them, because they had been seized with great fear. So he got into the boat and﻿* returned. 38 And the man from who the demons had gone out was begging him to stay with him, but he sent him away, saying, 39 “Return to your home and tell all that God has done for you.” And he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole town all that Jesus had done for him. 
A Woman Healed and a Daughter Raised
40 Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, because they were all waiting for him. 41 And behold, a man ⌊who was named⌋ Jairus came, and this man was a ruler of the synagogue. And he fell down at the feet of Jesus and﻿* began imploring﻿* him to come to his house, 42 because ⌊he had⌋ an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. 
Now as he was going, the crowds were pressing against him. 43 And a woman who was ⌊suffering from hemorrhages⌋ for twelve years (who, although she﻿* had spent all her﻿* assets on physicians, was not able to be healed by anyone) 44 came up behind him and﻿* touched the edge of his cloak, and immediately ⌊her hemorrhaging⌋ stopped. 45 And Jesus said, “Who is the one who touched me?” And when they﻿* all denied it,* Peter said, “Master, the crowds are pressing you hard and crowding you!”* 46 But Jesus said, “Someone touched me, because I know power has gone out from me.” 47 And when﻿* the woman saw that she did not escape notice, she came trembling and falling down before him. In the presence of all the people, she told for what reason she had touched him, and that she was healed immediately. 48 And he said to her, “Daughter, your faith has saved you. Go in peace.” 
49 While﻿* he was still speaking, someone came from the synagogue ruler’s house, saying, “Your daughter is dead! Trouble the Teacher no longer!” 50 But Jesus, when he﻿* heard this,* replied to him, “Do not be afraid! Only believe, and she will be healed.” 51 Now when he﻿* came to the house, he did not allow anyone to enter with him except Peter and John and James and the father and mother of the child. 52 And they were all weeping and mourning for her, but he said, “Do not weep! For she is not dead, but is sleeping.” 53 And they began laughing﻿* at him, because they﻿* knew that she was dead. 54 But he took her hand and﻿* called, saying, “Child, get up.” 55 And her spirit returned, and she got up immediately, and he ordered something﻿* to be given to her to eat. 56 And her parents were astonished, but he ordered them to tell no one what had happened. 
The Twelve Commissioned and Sent Out
9 And summoning the twelve, he gave them power and authority over all the demons and to cure diseases, 2 and he sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick. 3 And he said to them, “Take along nothing for the journey—neither a staff, nor a traveler’s bag, nor bread, nor money, nor to have two tunics apiece. 4 And into whatever house you enter, stay there and depart from there. 5 And as for all those who do not welcome you—when you﻿* depart from that town, shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony against them.” 6 So they departed and﻿* went throughout the villages, proclaiming the good news and healing everywhere. 
Herod Perplexed About Jesus
7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard about all that was happening, and he was greatly perplexed, because it was said by some that John has been raised from the dead, 8 and by some that Elijah had appeared, and others that some prophet of ancient times had risen. 9 And Herod said, “John I beheaded, but who is this about whom I hear such things?” And he was wanting to see him. 
The Feeding of Five Thousand
10 And when they﻿* returned, the apostles described to him all that they had done. And he took them along and﻿* withdrew privately to a town called Bethsaida. 11 But when﻿* the crowds found out, they followed him, and welcoming them, he began to speak﻿* to them about the kingdom of God, and he cured those who had need of healing. 12 Now the day began to be far spent, and the twelve came up and﻿* said to him, “Send away the crowd so that they can go into the surrounding villages and farms to obtain lodging and find provisions, because we are here in a desolate place. 13 But he said to them, “You give them something to eat!” And they said, “⌊We have no⌋ more than five loaves and two fish, unless perhaps we go and﻿* purchase food for all these people.” 14 (For there were about five thousand men.) So he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.” 15 And they did so, and had them all sit down. 16 And taking the five loaves and the two fish, and﻿* looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke them and began giving﻿* them﻿* to the disciples to set before the crowd. 17 And they all ate and were satisfied, and what was left over was picked up by them—twelve baskets of broken pieces. 
Peter’s Confession
18 And it happened that while he was praying alone, the disciples were with him. And he asked them, saying, “Who do the crowds say that I am?” 19 And they answered and﻿* said, “John the Baptist, but others, Elijah, and others, that one of the ancient prophets has risen.” 20 And he said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” And Peter answered and﻿* said, “The Christ of God.” 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection
21 But he warned and﻿* commanded them to tell this to no one, 22 saying, “It is necessary for the Son of Man to suffer many things and to be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be killed, and to be raised on the third day. 
Taking Up One’s Cross to Follow Jesus
23 And he said to them all, “If anyone wants to come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross every day and follow me. 24 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life on account of me, this person will save it. 25 For what is a person benefited if he﻿* gains the whole world but loses or forfeits himself? 26 For whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of this person when he comes in his glory and the glory﻿* of the Father and of the holy angels. 27 But I tell you truly, there are some of those standing here who will never experience death until they see the kingdom of God.” 
The Transfiguration
28 Now it happened that about eight days after these words, he took along Peter and John and James and﻿* went up on the mountain to pray. 29 And as he was praying, the appearance of his face became different, and his clothing became white, gleaming like lightning. 30 And behold, two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah, 31 who appeared in glory and﻿* were speaking about his departure which he was about to fulfill in Jerusalem. 
32 Now Peter and those with him were ⌊very sleepy⌋, but when they﻿* became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men who were standing with him. 33 And it happened that as they were going away from him, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good for us to be here. And let us make three shelters, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah,” not knowing what he was saying. 34 And while﻿* he was saying these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud. 35 And a voice came from the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, my Chosen One. Listen to him!” 36 And after the voice had occurred, Jesus was found alone. And they kept silent and told no one in those days anything of what they had seen. 
A Demon-possessed Boy Healed
37 Now it happened that on the next day, when﻿* they had come down from the mountain, a large crowd met him. 38 And behold, a man from the crowd cried out, saying, “Teacher, I beg you to look with concern on my son, because he is my only son! 39 And behold, a spirit seizes him and suddenly he screams, and it convulses him with foam and rarely withdraws from him, battering him severely. 40 And I begged your disciples that they would expel it, and they were not able to do so.” 41 So Jesus answered and﻿* said, “O unbelieving and perverted generation! ⌊How long⌋ will I be with you and put up with you? Bring your son here!” 42 And while﻿* he was still approaching, the demon threw him down and convulsed him.* But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father. 43 And they were all astounded at the impressiveness of God. 
Jesus Predicts His Suffering
But while they﻿* were all marveling at all the things that he was doing, he said to his disciples, 44 “⌊You take these words to heart⌋, for the Son of Man is about to be betrayed into the hands of men.” 45 But they did not understand this statement, and it was concealed from them so that they could not understand it. And they were afraid to ask him about this statement. 
The Question About Who Is Greatest
46 And an argument developed among them as to who of them might be greatest. 47 But Jesus, because he﻿* knew the thoughts of their hearts, took hold of a child and had him stand beside him 48 and said to them, “Whoever welcomes this child in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me. For the one who is least among you all—this one is great.” 
Whoever Is Not Against Us Is for Us
49 And John answered and﻿* said, “Master, we saw someone expelling demons in your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he does not follow in company with us.” 50 But Jesus said to him, “Do not prevent him,* because whoever is not against you is for you.” 
Jesus Rejected in a Samaritan Village
51 Now it happened that when the days were approaching ⌊for him to be taken up⌋, he set his﻿* face to go to Jerusalem. 52 And he sent messengers before ⌊him⌋, and they went and﻿* entered into a village of the Samaritans in order to prepare for him. 53 And they did not welcome him because ⌊he was determined to go⌋ to Jerusalem. 54 Now when﻿* the disciples James and John saw it,* they said, “Lord, do you want us to call fire to come down from heaven and consume them?” 55 But he turned around and﻿* rebuked them, 56 and they proceeded to another village. 
Would-be Followers
57 And as﻿* they were traveling on the road, someone said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go!” 58 And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his﻿* head.” 59 And he said to another, “Follow me!” But he said, “Lord, first allow me to go and﻿* bury my father.” 60 But he said to him, “Leave the dead to bury their own dead! But you go and﻿* proclaim the kingdom of God.” 61 And another person also said, “I will follow you, Lord, but first allow me to say farewell to those in my house.” 62 But Jesus said, “No one who puts his﻿* hand on the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God!” 
The Seventy-Two Appointed and Sent Out
10 And after these things, the Lord also appointed seventy-two others and sent them out two by two before ⌊him⌋ into every town and place where he was about to go. 2 And he said to them, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest that he send out workers into his harvest. 3 Go! Behold, I am sending you out like lambs in the midst of wolves! 4 Do not carry a money bag or a traveler’s bag or sandals, and greet no one along the road. 5 And into whatever house you enter, first say, “Peace be to this household!” 6 And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on him. But if not, it will return to you. 7 And remain in the same house, eating and drinking ⌊whatever they provide⌋, for the worker is worthy of his pay. Do not move from house to house. 8 And into whatever town you enter and they welcome you, eat ⌊whatever is⌋ set before you, 9 and heal the sick in it, and say to them, “The kingdom of God has come near to you.” 10 But into whatever town you enter and they do not welcome you, go out into its streets and﻿* say, 11 “Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet we wipe off against you! Nevertheless know this: that the kingdom of God has come near!” 12 I tell you that it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town! 
13 Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes! 14 But it will be more bearable for Tyre and for Sidon in the judgment than for you! 15 And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? No! You will be brought down to Hades! 16 The one who listens to you listens to me, and the one who rejects you rejects me. But the one who rejects me rejects the one who sent me.” 
17 And the seventy-two returned with joy, saying, “Lord, even the demons are subject to us in your name!” 18 So he said to them, “I saw Satan falling like lightning from heaven. 19 Behold, I have given you the authority to tread on snakes and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing will ever harm you. 20 Nevertheless, do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are inscribed in heaven.” 
Jesus Rejoices and Prays
21 At that same time he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent and have revealed them to young children. Yes, Father, for this was pleasing before you. 22 All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is except the Father and who the Father is except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son wants to reveal him.”* 
23 And turning to the disciples, he said privately, “Blessed are the eyes that see the things which you see! 24 For I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which you see, and did not see them,* and to hear the things which you hear, and did not hear them.”* 
The Parable of the Good Samaritan
25 And behold, a certain legal expert stood up to test him, saying, “Teacher, what must I do so that I will inherit eternal life?” 26 And he said to him, “What is written in the law? How do you read it?”* 27 And he answered and﻿* said, “You shall love the Lord your God from all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself.” 28 And he said to him, “You have answered correctly. Do this and you will live.” 
29 But he, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?” 30 And Jesus replied and﻿* said, “A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell into the hands of robbers, who both stripped him and beat him.* After﻿* inflicting blows on him,* they went away, leaving him﻿* half dead. 31 Now by coincidence a certain priest was going down on that road, and when he﻿* saw him, he passed by on the opposite side. 32 And in the same way also a Levite, when he﻿* came down to the place and saw him,* passed by on the opposite side. 33 But a certain Samaritan who was traveling came up to him and, when he﻿* saw him,* had compassion. 34 And he came up and﻿* bandaged his wounds, pouring on olive oil and wine, and he put him on his own animal and﻿* brought him to an inn and took care of him. 35 And on the next day, he took out two denarii and﻿* gave them﻿*﻿ to the innkeeper, and said, “Take care of him, and whatever you spend in addition, I will repay to you when I return. 36 Which of these three do you suppose became a neighbor of the man who fell among the robbers?” 37 So he said, “The one who showed mercy to him.” And Jesus said to him, “You go and do likewise.” 
Martha and Mary
38 Now as they traveled along, he entered into a certain village. And a certain woman ⌊named⌋ Martha welcomed him. 39 And ⌊she had⌋ a sister named Mary, who also sat at the feet of Jesus and﻿* was listening to his teaching. 40 But Martha was distracted with much preparation, so she approached and﻿* said, “Lord, is it not a concern to you that my sister has left me alone to make preparations? Then tell her that she should help me!” 41 But the Lord answered and﻿* said to her, “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things! 42 But few things are necessary, or only one thing, for Mary has chosen the better part, which will not be taken away from her.” 
How to Pray
11 And it happened that while he was in a certain place praying, when he stopped a certain one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.” 2 And he said to them, “When you pray, say, 
“Father, 
may your name be treated as holy. 
May your kingdom come. 
3 Give us each day our daily bread. 
4 And forgive us our sins, 
for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us. 
And do not lead us into temptation.” 
Ask, Seek, Knock
5 And he said to them, “Who of you will have a friend, and will go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves, 6 because a friend of mine has come to me on a journey, and I do not have anything to set before him.’ 7 And that one will answer from inside and﻿* say, ‘Do not cause me trouble! The door has already been shut and my children are with me in bed! I am not able to get up to give you anything.’* 8 I tell you, even if he does not give him anything﻿* after he﻿* gets up because he is his friend, at any rate because of his impudence he will get up and﻿* give him whatever he needs. 
9 And I tell you, ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and it will be opened for you. 10 For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened. 11 But what father from among you, if his﻿* son will ask for a fish, instead of a fish will give him a snake? 12 Or also, if he will ask for an egg, will give him a scorpion? 13 Therefore if you, although you﻿* are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the Father from heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?” 
A House Divided Cannot Stand
14 And he was expelling a mute demon. Now it happened that when﻿* the demon came out, the man who had been mute spoke, and the crowds were astonished. 15 But some of them said, “By Beelzebul the ruler of demons he expels demons!” 16 And others, in order to﻿* test him,* were demanding from him a sign from heaven. 17 But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and ⌊a divided household⌋ falls. 18 So if Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I expel demons by Beelzebul. 19 But if I expel demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons expel them?* For this reason they will be your judges! 20 But if I expel demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you! 21 When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own palace, his possessions are ⌊safe⌋. 22 But when a stronger man attacks him and﻿* conquers him, he takes away his full armor in which he trusted and distributes his plunder. 23 The one who is not with me is against me, and the one who does not gather with me scatters. 
An Unclean Spirit Returns
24 “Whenever an unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it travels through waterless places searching for rest, and does not find it.* It says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came out.’ 25 And when it﻿* arrives it finds the house﻿* swept and put in order. 26 Then it goes and brings along seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go in and﻿* live there. And the last state of that person becomes worse than the first!” 
27 Now it happened that as he said these things, a certain woman from the crowd raised her voice and﻿* said to him, “Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts at which you nursed!” 28 But he said, “On the contrary, blessed are those who hear the word of God and follow it!”* 
The Sign of Jonah
29 And as﻿* the crowds were increasing, he began to say, “This generation is an evil generation! It demands a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah! 30 For just as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so also the Son of Man will be to this generation. 31 The queen of the south will rise up at the judgment with the people of this generation and condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something﻿* greater than Solomon is here! 32 The people of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they repented at the proclamation of Jonah, and behold, something﻿* greater than Jonah is here! 
Light and Darkness
33 “No one after﻿* lighting a lamp puts it﻿* in a cellar or under a bushel basket, but on a lampstand, so that those who come in can see the light. 34 Your eye is the lamp of the body. When your eye is sincere, your whole body is full of light also. But when it is evil, your body is dark also. 35 Therefore pay careful attention that the light in you is not darkness! 36 If therefore your whole body is full of light, not having any part dark, it will be completely full of light, as when the lamp with its light gives light to you.” 
Pharisees and Legal Experts Denounced
37 And as he was speaking, a Pharisee asked him ⌊to have a meal⌋ with him, and he went in and﻿* reclined at table. 38 And the Pharisee, when he﻿* saw it,* was astonished that he did not first wash before the meal. 39 But the Lord said to him, “Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but your inside is full of greediness and wickedness. 40 Fools! Did not the one who made the outside make the inside also? 41 But give as charitable giving the things that are within, and behold, everything is clean for you. 
42 “But woe to you, Pharisees, because you pay a tenth of mint and rue and every garden herb, and neglect justice and love for God! But it was necessary to do these things without neglecting those things also. 43 Woe to you, Pharisees, because you love the best seat in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces! 44 Woe to you, because you are like unmarked graves, and the people who walk over them﻿* do not know it!* 
45 And one of the legal experts answered and﻿* said to him, “Teacher, when you﻿* say these things, you insult us also!” 46 So he said, “Woe to you also, legal experts, because you load people with burdens hard to bear, and you yourselves do not touch the burdens with one of your fingers! 47 Woe to you, because you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them! 48 As a result you are witnesses, and you approve of the deeds of your fathers, because they killed them and you build their tombs! 49 For this reason also the wisdom of God said, ‘I will send to them prophets and apostles, and some of them they will kill and persecute,’ 50 so that the blood of all the prophets that has been shed from the foundation of the world may be required of this generation, 51 from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who perished between the altar and the temple building. Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation! 52 Woe to you, legal experts, because you have taken away the key to knowledge! You did not enter yourselves, and you hindered those who were entering!” 
53 And when﻿* he departed from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began to be terribly hostile, and to question him closely about many things, 54 plotting to catch him with reference to something ⌊he might say⌋. 
Warning Against Hypocrisy
12 During ⌊this time⌋ when﻿* a crowd of many thousands had gathered together, so that they were trampling one another, he began to say to his disciples first, “Beware for yourselves of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 2 But nothing is concealed that will not be revealed, and secret that will not be made known. 3 Therefore everything that you have said in the dark will be heard in the light, and what ⌊you have whispered⌋ in the inner rooms will be proclaimed on the housetops. 
Fear God Rather Than People
4 “And I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body, and after these things do not have anything more to do. 5 But I will show you whom you should fear: fear the one who has authority, after the killing, to throw you﻿* into hell! Yes, I tell you, fear this one! 6 Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? And not one of them is forgotten in the sight of God. 7 But even the hairs of your head are all numbered! Do not be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows. 
Acknowledgement of Christ and Persecution of Disciples
8 “And I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before people, the Son of Man also will acknowledge him before the angels of God, 9 but the one who denies me before people will be denied before the angels of God. 10 And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him, but to the one who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven. 11 But when they bring you before the synagogues and the rulers and the authorities, do not be anxious how or what you should speak in your own defense or what you should say, 12 for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour what it is necessary to say.” 
The Parable of the Rich Landowner Who Was a Fool
13 Now someone from the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me!” 14 But he said to him, “Man, who made me a judge or an arbitrator over you?” 15 And he said to them, “Watch out and guard yourselves from all greediness, because not even when someone has an abundance ⌊does⌋ his life consist of his possessions.” 16 And he told a parable to them, saying, “The land of a certain rich man yielded an abundant harvest. 17 And he reasoned to himself, saying, ‘What should I do? For I do not have anywhere I can gather in my crops.’ 18 And he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my barns and build larger ones, and I will gather in there all my grain and possessions. 19 And I will say to my soul, “Soul, you have many possessions stored up for many years. Relax, eat, drink, celebrate!” ’ 20 But God said to him, ‘Fool! This night your life is demanded from you, and the things which you have prepared—whose will they be?’ 21 So is the one who stores up treasure for himself, and who is not rich toward God!” 
Anxiety
22 And he said to his disciples, “For this reason I tell you, do not be anxious for your﻿* life, what you will eat, or for your﻿* body, what you will wear. 23 For life is more than food, and the body more than clothing. 24 Consider the ravens, that they neither sow nor reap; to them there is neither storeroom nor barn, and God feeds them. How much more are you worth than the birds? 25 And which of you by﻿* being anxious is able to add an hour to his life span? 26 If then you are not even able to do a very little thing, why are you anxious about the rest? 27 Consider the lilies, how they grow: they do not toil or spin, but I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was dressed like one of these. 28 But if God clothes the grass in the field in this way, although it﻿* is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he do so for﻿* you, you of little faith? 29 And you, do not consider what you will eat and what you will drink, and do not be anxious. 30 For all the nations of the world seek after these things, and your Father knows that you need these things. 31 But seek his kingdom and these things will be added to you. 
32 “Do not be afraid, little flock, because your Father is well pleased to give you the kingdom. 33 Sell your possessions and give charitable gifts. Make for yourselves money bags that do not wear out, an inexhaustible treasure in heaven where thief does not approach or moth destroy. 34 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. 
On the Alert for the Master’s Return
35 “⌊You must be prepared for action⌋ and your﻿* lamps burning. 36 And you, be like people who are waiting for their master when he returns from the wedding feast, so that when he﻿* comes back and knocks, they can open the door﻿* for him immediately. 37 Blessed are those slaves whom the master will find on the alert when he returns! Truly I say to you that he will dress himself for service and have them recline at the table and will come by and﻿* serve them. 38 Even if he should come back in the second or in the third watch of the night and find them﻿* like this, blessed are they! 39 But understand this, that if the master of the house had known what hour the thief was coming, he would not have left his house to be broken into. 40 You also must be ready, because the Son of Man is coming at an hour that you do not think he will come.”* 
A Faithful Slave and an Unfaithful Slave
41 And Peter said, “Lord, are you telling this parable for us, or also for everyone?” 42 And the Lord said, “Who then is the faithful wise manager whom the master will put in charge over his servants to give them﻿* their﻿* food allowance at the right time? 43 Blessed is that slave whom his master will find so doing when he﻿* comes back. 44 Truly I say to you that he will put him in charge of all his possessions. 45 But if that slave should say ⌊to himself⌋, ‘My master is taking a long time to return,’ and he begins to beat the male slaves and the female slaves and to eat and drink and get drunk, 46 the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and at an hour that he does not know, and will cut him in two and assign his place with the unbelievers. 47 And that slave who knew the will of his master and did not prepare or do according to his will ⌊will be given a severe beating⌋. 48 But the one who did not know and did things deserving blows ⌊will be given a light beating⌋. And from everyone to whom much has been given, much will be demanded, and from him to whom they entrusted much, they will ask him for even more. 
Not Peace, But a Sword of Divisiveness
49 “I have come to bring fire on the earth, and how I wish that it had been kindled already! 50 But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how I am distressed until it is accomplished! 51 Do you think that I have come to grant peace on the earth? No, I tell you, but rather division! 52 For from now on there will be five in one household, divided three against two and two against three. 53 They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.” 
The Signs of the Times
54 And he also said to the crowds, “When you see a cloud coming up in the west, you say at once, ‘A rainstorm is coming,’ and so it happens. 55 And when you see the south wind blowing, you say, ‘There will be burning heat,’ and it happens. 56 Hypocrites! You know how to evaluate the appearance of the earth and the sky, but how is it you do not know how to evaluate this present time? 
Settle Accounts Quickly
57 And why do you not also judge for yourselves what is right? 58 For as you are going with your accuser before the magistrate, make an effort to come to a settlement with him on the way, so that he will not drag you to the judge, and the judge will hand you over to the bailiff, and the bailiff will throw you into prison. 59 I tell you, you will never get out of there until you have paid back even the last cent!” 
Repent or Perish
13 Now at the same time some had come to tell him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices. 2 And he answered and﻿* said to them, “Do you think that these Galileans were sinners worse than all the Galileans, because they suffered these things? 3 No, I tell you, but unless you repent you will all perish as well! 4 Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them—do you think that they were sinners worse than all the people who live in Jerusalem? 5 No, I tell you, but unless you repent, you will all perish as well!” 
The Parable of the Barren Fig Tree
6 And he told this parable: “A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it and did not find any.* 7 So he said to the gardener, ‘Behold, ⌊for three years⌋ I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree and did not find any.* Cut it down! Why should it even exhaust the soil?’ 8 But he answered and﻿* said to him, ‘Sir, leave it alone this year also, until I dig around it and put manure on it.* 9 And if indeed it produces fruit in the coming year, so much the better,* but if not, you can cut it down.’ ” 
A Woman with a Disabling Spirit Healed
10 Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath. 11 And behold, a woman was there﻿* who had a spirit ⌊that had disabled her⌋ for eighteen years, and she was bent over and not able to straighten herself up completely. 12 And when he﻿* saw her, Jesus summoned her﻿* and said to her, “Woman, you are freed from your disability!” 13 And he placed his hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and glorified God. 14 But the ruler of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, answered and﻿* said to the crowd, “There are six days on which it is necessary to work. Therefore come and﻿* be healed on them, and not on the day of the Sabbath!” 15 But the Lord answered and said to him, “Hypocrites! Does not each one of you untie his ox or his﻿* donkey from the feeding trough on the Sabbath and lead it﻿* away to water it?* 16 And this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan bound ⌊eighteen⌋ long years—is it not necessary that she be released from this bond on the day of the Sabbath?” 17 And when﻿* he said these things, all those who opposed him were humiliated, and the whole crowd was rejoicing at all the splendid things that were being done by him. 
The Parable of the Mustard Seed
18 Therefore he said, “What is the kingdom of God like, and to what shall I compare it? 19 It is like a mustard seed that a man took and﻿* sowed in his own garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the sky nested in its branches.” 
The Parable of the Yeast
20 And again he said, “To what shall I compare the kingdom of God? 21 It is like yeast that a woman took and﻿* hid in three measures of wheat flour until the whole batch was leavened.” 
The Narrow Door
22 And he was going throughout towns and villages, teaching and making his journey toward Jerusalem. 23 And someone said to him, “Lord, ⌊are there only⌋ a few who are saved?” And he said to them, 24 “Make every effort to enter through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able to, 25 when once the master of the house has gotten up and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and knock on the door, saying, ‘Lord, open the door﻿* for us!’ And he will answer and﻿* say to you, ‘I do not know where you are from!’ 26 Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets!’ 27 And he will reply, saying to you, ‘I do not know where you are from! Go away from me, all you ⌊evildoers⌋!’ 28 In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but yourselves thrown outside! 29 And they will come from east and west, and from north and south, and will recline at the table in the kingdom of God. 30 And behold, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.” 
The Lament over Jerusalem
31 At that same hour some Pharisees came up and﻿* said to him, “Go out and depart from here, because Herod wants to kill you!” 32 And he said to them, “Go and﻿* tell that fox, ‘Behold, I am expelling demons and performing healings today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will complete my work.’* 33 Nevertheless, it is necessary for me to be on the way today and tomorrow and on the next day, because it is not possible for a prophet to perish outside Jerusalem. 
34 “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the one who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How many times I wanted to gather your children together ⌊the way⌋ a hen gathers﻿* her own brood under her wings, and you were not willing! 35 Behold, your house has been left to you! And I tell you, you will never see me until the time﻿* will come when you say, ‘Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!’ ” 
A Man Suffering from Edema Healed
14 And it happened that when he came to the house of a certain one of the leaders of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat ⌊a meal⌋, they were watching him closely. 2 And behold, a certain man was in front of him, suffering from edema. 3 And Jesus answered and﻿* said to the legal experts and Pharisees, saying, “Is it permitted to heal on the Sabbath, or not?” 4 But they remained silent. And he took hold of him﻿* and﻿* healed him, and sent him﻿* away. 5 And he said to them, “Who among you, if your﻿* son or your ox falls into a well on the day of the Sabbath, will not immediately pull him out?” 6 And they were not able to make a reply to these things. 
The Parable of the Guests at the Wedding Feast
7 Now he told a parable to those who had been invited when he﻿* noticed how they were choosing for themselves the places of honor, saying to them, 8 “When you are invited by someone to a wedding feast, do not recline at the table in the place of honor, lest someone more distinguished than you has been invited by him, 9 and the one who invited you ⌊both⌋ will come and﻿* say to you, ‘Give the place to this person,’ and then with shame you will begin to take the last place. 10 But when you are invited, go and﻿* recline at the table in the last place, so that when the one who invited you comes, he will say to you, ‘Friend, move up higher.’ Then it will be an honor to you in the presence of all those who are reclining at the table with you. 11 For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and the one who humbles himself will be exalted.” 
The Parable of the Great Banquet
12 And he also said to the one who had invited him, “When you give a dinner or a banquet, do not invite your friends or your brothers or your relatives or wealthy neighbors, lest they also invite you in return, and repayment come to you. 13 But whenever you give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind, 14 and you will be blessed, because they are not able to repay you. For it will be paid back to you at the resurrection of the righteous.” 
15 Now when﻿* one of those reclining at the table with him heard these things, he said to him, “Blessed is ⌊everyone who⌋ will eat bread in the kingdom of God!” 16 But he said to him, “A certain man was giving a large banquet and invited many. 17 And he sent his slave at the hour of the banquet to say to those who have been invited, ‘Come, because now it is ready!’ 18 And they all ⌊alike⌋ began to excuse themselves. The first said to him, ‘I have purchased a field, and ⌊I must⌋ go out to look at it. I ask you, consider me excused.’ 19 And another said, ‘I have purchased five yoke of oxen, and I am going to examine them. I ask you, consider me excused.’ 20 And another said, ‘I have married a wife, and for this reason I am not able to come.’ 21 And the slave came and﻿* reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and﻿* said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and alleys of the city and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame!’ 22 And the slave said, ‘Sir, what you ordered has been done, and there is still room.’ 23 And the master said to the slave, ‘Go out into the highways and hedges and press them﻿* to come in, so that my house will be filled! 24 For I say to you that none of those persons who were invited will taste my banquet!’ ” 
The Cost of Discipleship
25 Now large crowds were going along with him, and he turned around and﻿* said to them, 26 “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, and furthermore, even his own life, ⌊he cannot be⌋ my disciple. 27 Whoever does not carry his own cross and ⌊follow⌋ me ⌊cannot be⌋ my disciple. 28 For which of you, wanting to build a tower, does not first sit down and﻿* calculate the cost to see if he has enough﻿* ⌊to complete it⌋? 29 ⌊Otherwise⌋ after﻿* he has laid the foundation and is not able to finish it,* all who see it﻿* will begin to ridicule him, 30 saying, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish!’ 31 Or what king, going out to engage another king in battle, does not sit down first and﻿* deliberate whether he is able with ten thousand to oppose the one coming against him with twenty thousand. 32 But if not, while﻿* the other is still far away, he sends an ambassador and﻿* asks ⌊for terms of⌋ peace. 33 In the same way, therefore, every one of you who does not renounce all his own possessions ⌊cannot be⌋ my disciple. 
34 “Now salt is good, but if salt becomes tasteless, with what will it be made salty? 35 It is usable neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; they throw it out. The one who has ears to hear, let him hear!” 
The Parable of the Lost Sheep
15 Now all the tax collectors and the sinners were drawing near to hear him. 2 And both the Pharisees and the scribes were complaining, saying, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them!” 
3 So he told them this parable, saying, 4 “What man of you, having a hundred sheep and losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the grassland and go after the one that was lost until he finds it? 5 And when he﻿* has found it,* he places it﻿* on his shoulders, rejoicing. 6 And when he﻿* returns to his﻿* home, he calls together his﻿* friends and neighbors, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost!’ 7 I tell you that in the same way, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous people who have no need of repentance. 
The Parable of the Lost Coin
8 Or what woman who has ten drachmas, if she loses one drachma, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and search carefully until she finds it?* 9 And when she﻿* has found it,* she calls together her﻿* friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found the drachma that I had lost!’ 10 In the same way, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents.” 
The Parable of the Lost Son
11 And he said, “A certain man had two sons. 12 And the younger of them said to his﻿* father, ‘Father, give me the share of the property that is coming to me.’ So he divided his﻿* assets between them. 13 And after not many days, the younger son gathered everything and﻿* went on a journey to a distant country, and there he squandered his wealth by﻿* living wastefully. 14 And after﻿* he had spent everything, there was a severe famine throughout that country, and he began to be in need. 15 And he went and﻿* hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to tend pigs. 16 And he was longing to fill his stomach with the carob pods that the pigs were eating, and no one was giving anything﻿* to him. 
17 “But when he﻿* came to himself, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired workers have an abundance ⌊of food⌋, and I am dying here from hunger! 18 I will set out and﻿* go to my father and will say to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and ⌊in your sight⌋! 19 I am no longer worthy to be called your son! Make me like one of your hired workers.’ 20 And he set out and﻿* came to his own father. But while﻿* he was still a long way away, his father saw him and had compassion, and ran ⌊and embraced him⌋ and kissed him. 21 And his﻿* son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and ⌊in your sight⌋! I am no longer worthy to be called your son!’ 22 But his﻿* father said to his slaves, ‘Quickly bring out the best robe and put it﻿* on him, and put a ring on his finger and sandals on his﻿* feet! 23 And bring the fattened calf—kill it﻿* and let us eat and﻿* celebrate, 24 because this son of mine was dead, and is alive again! He was lost and is found!’ And they began to celebrate. 
25 “Now his older son was in the field, and when he came and﻿* approached the house, he heard music and dancing. 26 And he summoned one of the slaves and﻿* asked what these things meant. 27 And he said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has gotten him back healthy.’ 28 But he became angry and did not want to go in. So his father came out and﻿* began to implore﻿* him. 29 But he answered and﻿* said to his father, ‘Behold, so many years I have served you, and have never disobeyed your command! And you never gave me a young goat so that I could celebrate with my friends! 30 But when this son of yours returned—who has consumed your assets with prostitutes—you killed the fattened calf for him!’ 31 But he said to him, ‘Child, you are always with me, and ⌊everything I have belongs to you⌋. 32 But it was necessary to celebrate and to rejoice, because this brother of yours was dead, and is alive, and was lost, and is found!’ ” 
The Parable of the Dishonest Manager
16 And he also said to the disciples, “A certain man was rich, who had a manager. And charges were brought to him that this person was squandering his possessions. 2 And he summoned him and﻿* said to him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Give the account of your management, because you can no longer manage.’ 3 And the manager said to himself, ‘What should I do, because my master is taking away the management from me? I am not strong enough to dig; I am ashamed to beg. 4 I know what I should do, so that when I am removed from the management they will welcome me into their homes!’ 5 And he summoned each one of his own master’s debtors and﻿* said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’ 6 And he said, ‘A hundred measures of olive oil.’ So he said to him, ‘Take your promissory note and sit down quickly and﻿* write fifty.’ 7 Then he said to another, ‘And how much do you owe?’ And he said, ‘A hundred measures of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take your promissory note and write eighty.’ 8 And the master praised the dishonest manager, because he had acted shrewdly. For the sons of this age are shrewder than the sons of light with regard to their own generation. 9 And I tell you, make friends for yourselves by means of unrighteous wealth, so that when it runs out they will welcome you into the eternal dwellings. 
10 “The one who is faithful in very little is also faithful in much, and the one who is dishonest in very little is also dishonest in much. 11 If then you have not been faithful with unrighteous wealth, who will entrust to you the true riches?* 12 And if you have not been faithful with what belongs to another, who will give you your own? 13 No domestic slave is able to serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one and will despise the other. You are not able to serve God and money.” 
Hypocrisy, Law, and the Kingdom of God
14 Now the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things, and they ridiculed him. 15 And he said to them, “You are the ones who justify themselves in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts! For what is considered exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God. 
16 “The law and the prophets were until John; from that time on the kingdom of God has been proclaimed, and everyone is urgently pressed into it. 17 But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of a letter of the law to become invalid. 
On Divorce
18 “Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and the one who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery. 
The Rich Man and Lazarus
19 “Now a certain man was rich, and dressed in purple cloth and fine linen, feasting sumptuously every day. 20 And a certain poor man ⌊named⌋ Lazarus, covered with sores, lay at his gate, 21 and was longing to be filled with what fell from the table of the rich man. But even the dogs came and﻿* licked his sores. 22 Now it happened that the poor man died, and he was carried away by the angels to ⌊Abraham’s side⌋. And the rich man also died and was buried. 23 And in Hades he lifted up his eyes as he﻿* was in torment and﻿* saw Abraham from a distance, and Lazarus ⌊at his side⌋. 24 And he called out and﻿* said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus so that he could dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am suffering pain in this flame!’ 25 But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you received your good things during your life, and Lazarus likewise bad things. But now he is comforted here, but you are suffering pain. 26 And in addition to all these things, a great chasm has been established between us and you, so that those who want to cross over from here to you are not able to do so,* nor can they cross over from there to us.’ 27 So he said, ‘Then I ask you, father, that you send him to my father’s house, 28 for I have five brothers, so that he could warn them, in order that they also should not come to this place of torment!’ 29 But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the prophets; they must listen to them.’ 30 And he said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent!’ 31 But he said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced if someone rises from the dead.’ ” 
Sin, Forgiveness, Faith, and Service
17 And he said to his disciples, “It is impossible for causes for stumbling not to come, but woe to him through whom they come! 2 It would be better for him if ⌊a millstone⌋ is placed around his neck and he is thrown into the sea than that he causes one of these little ones to sin. 
3 “Be concerned about yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him. 4 And if he sins against you seven times in a day, and seven times he returns to you saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.” 
5 And the apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!” 6 So the Lord said, “If you have faith like a mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you. 
7 “And which of you who has a slave plowing or shepherding sheep﻿* who comes in from the field will say to him, ‘Come here at once and﻿* recline at the table’? 8 Will he not rather say to him, ‘Prepare something that I may eat, and dress yourself to serve me while I eat and drink, and after these things you will eat and drink.’ 9 He will not ⌊be grateful⌋ to the slave because he did what was ordered, will he?* 10 Thus you also, when you have done all the ⌊things you were ordered to do⌋, say, ‘We are unworthy slaves; we have done what we were obligated to do.’ ” 
Ten Lepers Cleansed
11 And it happened that while traveling toward Jerusalem, he was passing through ⌊the region between⌋ Samaria and Galilee. 12 And as﻿* he was entering into a certain village, ten men met him﻿*﻿—lepers, who stood at a distance. 13 And they raised their voices, saying, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!” 14 And when he﻿* saw them﻿* he said to them, “Go and﻿* show yourselves to the priests.” And it happened that as they were going, they were cleansed. 15 But one of them, when he﻿* saw that he was healed, turned back, praising God with a loud voice. 16 And he fell on his face at his feet, giving thanks to him. And he was a Samaritan. 17 So Jesus answered and﻿* said, “Were not ten cleansed? And where are the nine? 18 Was no one found to turn back and﻿* give praise to God except this foreigner?” 19 And he said to him, “Get up and﻿* go your way. Your faith has saved you.” 
The Coming of the Kingdom of God
20 Now when he﻿* was asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God would come, he answered them and said, “The kingdom of God does not come with ⌊things that can be observed⌋, 21 nor will they say, ‘Behold, here it is!’ or ‘There!’ For behold, the kingdom of God is in your midst.” 
The Coming of the Son of Man
22 And he said to the disciples, “Days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.* 23 And they will say to you, ‘Behold, there!’ ‘Behold, here!’ Do not go out or run after them!* 24 For just as the lightning shines forth, flashing from one place under heaven to another place under heaven, so the Son of Man will be in his day. 25 But first it is necessary for him to suffer many things, and to be rejected by this generation. 26 And just as it was in the days of Noah, so also it will be in the days of the Son of Man—27 they were eating, they were drinking, they were marrying, they were being given in marriage, until the day Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all. 28 Likewise, just as it was in the days of Lot—they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building. 29 But on the day that Lot went out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulphur from heaven and destroyed them all. 30 It will be ⌊just the same⌋ on the day that the Son of Man is revealed. 31 On that day, whoever is on the housetop and his goods are in the house must not come down to take them away. And likewise the one who is in the field must not turn back 32 Remember Lot’s wife! 33 Whoever seeks to preserve his life will lose it, but whoever loses it﻿* will keep it. 34 I tell you that in that night there will be two in one bed; one will be taken and the other will be left. 35 There will be two women﻿* grinding at the same place; one will be taken and the other will be left.” 
37 And they answered and﻿* said to him, “Where, Lord?” So he said to them, “Where the dead body is, there also the vultures will be gathered.” 
The Parable of the Unjust Judge
18 And he told them a parable to show that they must always pray and not be discouraged, 2 saying, “There was a certain judge in a certain town who did not fear God and did not respect people. 3 And there was a widow in that town, and she kept coming to him, saying, ‘Grant me justice against my adversary!’ 4 And he was not willing for a time, but after these things he said to himself, ‘Even if I do not fear God or respect people, 5 yet because this widow is causing trouble for me, I will grant her justice, so that she does not wear me down in the end by her﻿* coming back!’ ” 6 And the Lord said, “Listen to what the unrighteous judge is saying! 7 And will not God surely ⌊see to it that justice is done⌋ to his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night, and will he delay toward them? 8 I tell you that ⌊he will see to it that justice is done⌋ for them soon! Nevertheless, when﻿* the Son of Man comes, then will he find faith on earth?” 
The Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector
9 And he also told this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and looked down on ⌊everyone else⌋: 10 “Two men went up to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector. 11 The Pharisee stood and﻿* prayed these things with reference to himself: ‘God, I give thanks to you that I am not like other people—swindlers, unrighteous people, adulterers, or even like this tax collector! 12 I fast twice a week; I give a tenth of all that I get.’ 13 But the tax collector, standing far away, did not want even to raise his eyes to heaven, but was beating his breast, saying, ‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner!’ 14 I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than that one! For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.” 
Little Children Brought to Jesus
15 Now they were bringing even their﻿* babies to him so that he could touch them. But when﻿* the disciples saw it,* they rebuked them. 16 But Jesus called them to himself, saying, “Allow the children to come to me, and do not forbid them, ⌊for to such belongs⌋ the kingdom of God. 17 Truly I say to you, whoever does not welcome the kingdom of God like a young child will never enter into it.” 
A Rich Young Man
18 And a certain ruler asked him, saying, “Good Teacher, by﻿* doing what will I inherit eternal life?” 19 And Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone. 20 You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not give false testimony, honor your father and mother.’ ” 21 And he said, “All these I have observed from my youth.” 22 And when he﻿* heard this,* Jesus said to him, “⌊You still lack one thing⌋: Sell all that you have, and distribute the proceeds﻿* to the poor—and you will have treasure in heaven—and come, follow me.” 23 But when he﻿* heard these things he became very sad, because he was extremely wealthy. 
24 And Jesus took notice of him and﻿* said, “How ⌊difficult it is for⌋ those who possess wealth to enter into the kingdom of God! 25 For it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter into the kingdom of God. 26 So those who heard this﻿* said, “And who can be saved?” 27 But he said, “What is impossible with men is possible with God.” 
28 And Peter said, “Behold, we have left ⌊all that is ours⌋ and﻿* followed you.” 29 And he said to them, “Truly I say to you that there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children on account of the kingdom of God, 30 who will not receive many times more in this time and in the age to come, eternal life.” 
Jesus Predicts His Death and Resurrection a Third Time
31 And taking aside the twelve, he said to them, “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written by the prophets with reference to the Son of Man will be accomplished. 32 For he will be handed over to the Gentiles and will be mocked and mistreated and spit on, 33 and after﻿* flogging him﻿* they will kill him, and on the third day he will rise.” 34 And they understood none of these things, and this saying was concealed from them, and they did not comprehend the things that were said. 
A Blind Man Healed at Jericho
35 Now it happened that as he drew near to Jericho, a certain blind man was sitting on the side of the road begging. 36 And when he﻿* heard a crowd going by, he inquired what this meant. 37 And they told him, “Jesus the Nazarene is passing by.” 38 And he called out, saying, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!” 39 And those who were in front rebuked him, that he should be silent, but he cried out ⌊even more loudly⌋, “Son of David, have mercy on me!” 40 So Jesus stopped and﻿* ordered him to be brought to him. And when﻿* he approached, he asked him, 41 “What do you want me to do for you?” And he said, “Lord, that I may regain my sight. 42 And Jesus said to him, “Regain your sight! Your faith has saved you.” 43 And immediately he regained his sight and began to follow﻿* him, glorifying God. And all the people, when they﻿* saw it,* gave praise to God. 
Jesus and Zacchaeus
19 And he entered and﻿* traveled through Jericho. 2 And ⌊there was⌋ a man ⌊named⌋ Zacchaeus, and he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich. 3 And he was seeking to see Jesus—who he was—and he was not able to as a result of the crowd, because he was short in stature. 4 And he ran on ahead and﻿* climbed up into a sycamore tree so that he could see him, because he was going to go through that way. 5 And when he came to the place, Jesus looked up and﻿* said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down quickly, because it is necessary for me to stay at your house today!” 6 And he came down quickly and welcomed him joyfully. 7 And when they﻿* saw it,* they all began to complain,* saying, “He has gone in to find lodging with a man who is a sinner!” 8 And Zacchaeus stopped and﻿* said to the Lord, “Behold, half of my possessions, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and if I have extorted anything from anyone, I am paying it﻿* back four times as much!” 9 And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham. 10 For the Son of Man came to seek and to save those who are lost.” 
The Parable of the Ten Minas
11 Now while﻿* they were listening to these things, he went on and﻿* told a parable, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear immediately. 12 Therefore he said, “A certain nobleman traveled to a distant country to receive for himself a kingdom and to return. 13 And summoning ten of his own slaves, he gave them ten minas and said to them, ‘Do business ⌊until I come back⌋.’ 14 But his citizens hated him, and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We do not want this man to be king over us!’ 15 And it happened that when he returned after﻿* receiving the kingdom, he ordered these slaves to whom he had given the money to be summoned to him, so that he could know what they had gained by trading. 16 So the first arrived, saying, ‘Sir, your mina has made ten minas more!’ 17 And he said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because you have been faithful in a very small thing, ⌊have authority⌋ over ten cities.’ 18 And the second came, saying, ‘Sir, your mina has made five minas.’ 19 So he said to this one also, ‘And you be over five cities.’ 20 And another came, saying, ‘Sir, behold your mina, which I had put away for safekeeping in a piece of cloth. 21 For I was afraid of you, because you are a severe man—you withdraw what you did not deposit, and you reap what you did not sow!’ 22 He said to him, ‘⌊By your own words⌋ I will judge you, wicked slave! You knew that I am a severe man, withdrawing what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow. 23 And why did you not give my money to the bank, and I, when I﻿* returned, would have collected it with interest?’ 24 And to the bystanders he said, ‘Take away from him the mina and give it﻿* to the one who has the ten minas!’ 25 And they said to him, ‘Sir, he has ten minas.’ 26 ‘I tell you that to everyone who has, more will be given. But from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away. 27 But these enemies of mine who did not want me to be king over them—bring them﻿* here and slaughter them in my presence!’ ” 
The Triumphal Entry
28 And after he﻿* had said these things, he traveled on ahead, going up to Jerusalem. 29 And it happened that when he drew near to Bethphage and Bethany, to the hill called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples, 30 saying, ‘Go into the village in front of you, in which as you﻿* enter you will find a colt tied, on which ⌊no person has ever⌋ sat, and untie it and﻿* bring it.* 31 And if anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’* you will say this: ‘The Lord has need of it.’ ” 32 So those who were sent went and﻿* found it﻿* just as he had told them. 33 And as﻿* they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, ‘Why are you untying the colt?’ 34 So they said, ‘The Lord has need of it.’ 35 And they brought it to Jesus, and throwing their cloaks on the colt, they put Jesus on it. 36 And as﻿* he was going along, they were spreading out their cloaks on the road. 37 Now as﻿* he was drawing near by this time to the descent from the Mount of Olives, the whole crowd of the disciples began rejoicing to praise God with a loud voice for all the miracles that they had seen, 38 saying, 
“Blessed is the king, 
the one who comes in the name of the Lord! 
Peace in heaven 
and glory in the highest!” 
39 And some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples!” 40 And he answered and﻿* said, “I tell you that if these keep silent, the stones will cry out!” 
Jesus Weeps over Jerusalem
41 And when he approached and﻿* saw the city, he wept over it, 42 saying, “If you had known on this day—even you—the things that make for peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes. 43 For days will come upon you and your enemies will put up an embankment against you, and will surround you and press you hard from all directions. 44 And they will raze you to the ground, you and your children within you, and will not leave a stone upon a stone within you, ⌊because⌋ you did not recognize the time of your visitation.” 
The Cleansing of the Temple
45 And he entered into the temple courts﻿* and﻿* began to drive out those who were selling, 46 saying to them, “It is written, ‘And my house will be a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a cave of robbers!” 
47 And he was teaching every day in the temple courts,* and the chief priests and the scribes and the most prominent men of the people were seeking to destroy him. 48 And they did not find anything they could do, because all the people were paying close attention to what they were hearing from him. 
Jesus’ Authority Challenged
20 And it happened that on one of the days while﻿* he was teaching the people in the temple courts﻿* and proclaiming the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes approached together with the elders 2 and said, saying to him, “Tell us, by what authority you are doing these things, or who is the one who gave you this authority? 3 And he answered and﻿* said to them, “I also will ask you a question, and you tell me: 4 The baptism of John—was it from heaven or from men? 5 And they discussed this﻿* with one another, saying, “If we say ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’ 6 But if we say, ‘From men,’ all the people will stone us to death, because they are convinced that John was a prophet.” 7 And they replied that they did not know where it was from. 8 And Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.” 
The Parable of the Tenant Farmers in the Vineyard
9 And he began to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, and leased it to tenant farmers, and went on a journey for a long time. 10 And at the proper time he sent a slave to the tenant farmers, so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenant farmers sent him away empty-handed after﻿* beating him.* 11 And he proceeded to send another slave, but they beat and dishonored that one also, and﻿* sent him﻿* away empty-handed. 12 And he proceeded to send a third, but they wounded and﻿* threw out this one also. 13 So the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.’ 14 But when﻿* the tenant farmers saw him, they began to reason﻿* with one another, saying, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him so that the inheritance will become ours!’ 15 And they threw him out of the vineyard and﻿* killed him.* What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them? 16 He will come and destroy those tenant farmers and give the vineyard to others.” And when they﻿* heard this,* they said, “May this never happen!” 17 But he looked intently at them and﻿* said, “What then is this that is written: 
‘The stone which the builders rejected, 
this has become ⌊the cornerstone⌋.’ 
18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and the one on whom it falls—it will crush him!” 19 And the scribes and the chief priests sought to lay their﻿* hands on him at that same hour, and they were afraid of the people, for they knew that he had told this parable with reference to them. 
Paying Taxes to Caesar
20 And they watched him﻿* closely and﻿* sent spies who pretended they were upright, in order that they could catch him in a statement, so that they could hand him over to the authority and the jurisdiction of the governor. 21 And they asked him, saying, “Teacher, we know that you speak and teach rightly, and do not ⌊show partiality⌋, but teach the way of God in truth. 22 Is it permitted for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?” 23 But seeing through their craftiness, he said to them, 24 “Show me a denarius! Whose image and inscription does it have?” And they answered and﻿* said, “Caesar’s.” 25 So he said to them, “Well then, give to Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God!” 26 And they were not able to catch him﻿*﻿ in a statement in the sight of the people, and astonished at his answer, they became silent. 
A Question About Marriage and the Resurrection
27 Now some of the Sadducees—who deny ⌊that there is a resurrection⌋—came up and﻿* asked him, 28 saying, “Teacher, Moses wrote for us if someone’s brother dies having a wife, and this man is childless, that his brother should take the wife and ⌊father⌋ descendants for his brother. 29 Now there were seven brothers, and the first took a wife and﻿* died childless, 30 and the second, 31 and the third took her, and likewise also the seven did not leave children and died. 32 Finally the woman also died. 33 Therefore in the resurrection, the woman—whose wife will she be? For the seven had her as wife.” 34 And Jesus said to them, “The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage, 35 but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and to the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage, 36 for they are not even able to die any longer, because they are like the angels and are sons of God, because they﻿* are sons of the resurrection. 37 But that the dead are raised, even Moses revealed in the passage about﻿* the bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. 38 Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to him!” 39 And some of the scribes answered and﻿* said, “Teacher, you have spoken well.” 40 For they no longer dared to ask him anything. 
David’s Son and Lord
41 But he said to them, “In what sense do they say that the Christ is David’s son? 42 For David himself says in the book of Psalms, 
‘The Lord said to my Lord, 
“Sit at my right hand, 
43 until I make your enemies 
a footstool for your feet.” ’ 
44 David therefore calls him ‘Lord,’ and how is he his son?” 
Warning to Beware of the Scribes
45 And while﻿* all the people were listening, he said to the disciples, 46 “Beware of the scribes, who like walking around in long robes and who love greetings in the marketplaces and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets, 47 who devour the houses of widows and pray lengthy prayers for the sake of appearance. These will receive more severe condemnation!” 
A Poor Widow’s Offering
21 And he looked up and﻿* saw the rich putting their gifts into the contribution box, 2 and he saw a certain poor widow putting in there two small copper coins. 3 And he said, “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than all of them. 4 For these all put gifts﻿* into the offering out of their abundance, but this woman out of her poverty put in all the means of subsistence that she had.” 
The Destruction of the Temple Predicted
5 And while﻿* some were speaking about the temple, that it was adorned with precious stones and votive offerings, he said, 6 “As for these things that you see—days will come in which not one stone will be left on another stone that will not be thrown down!” 
Signs of the End of the Age
7 And they asked him, saying, “Teacher, when therefore will these things happen, and what will be the sign when these things are about to take place?” 8 And he said, Watch out that you are not deceived! For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and ‘The time is near!’ Do not go after them! 9 And when you hear about wars and insurrections, do not be terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end will not be at once.” 10 Then he said to them, “nation will rise up against nation and kingdom against kingdom. 11 There will be great earthquakes and famines and plagues in various places. There will be terrible sights and great signs from heaven. 
Persecution of Disciples Predicted
12 “But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you and will persecute you,* handing you﻿* over to the synagogues and prisons. You will be brought before﻿* kings and governors because of my name. 13 This will turn out to you for a time of witness. 14 ⌊Therefore make up your minds⌋ not to prepare in advance to speak in your own defense, 15 for I will give you a mouth and wisdom that all your opponents will not be able to resist or contradict. 16 And you will be handed over even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put to death some of you. 17 And you will be hated by all because of my name. 18 Even a hair of your head will never perish! 19 By your patient endurance you will gain your lives. 
The Desolation of Jerusalem
20 “But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation has come near. 21 Then those in Judea must flee to the mountains, and those ⌊inside it⌋ must depart, and those in the fields must not enter into it, 22 because these are days of vengeance, so that all the things that are written can be fulfilled. 23 Woe to those ⌊who are pregnant⌋ and to those who are nursing their babies﻿* in those days! For there will be great distress on the earth and wrath against this people, 24 and they will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led captive into all the nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. 
The Arrival of the Son of Man
25 “And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth distress of nations in perplexity from the noise of the sea and its surging, 26 people fainting from fear and expectation of what is coming on the inhabited earth, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. 27 And then they will see the Son of Man arriving in a cloud with power and great glory. 28 But when﻿* these things begin to happen, stand up straight and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near!” 
The Parable of the Fig Tree
29 And he told them a parable: “Look at the fig tree and all the trees. 30 When they put out foliage,* now you see for yourselves and﻿* know that by this time the summer is near. 31 So also you, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near. 32 Truly I say to you that this generation will never pass away until all things take place! 33 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away. 
Be Alert
34 “But take care for yourselves, lest your hearts are weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and the worries of daily life, and that day come upon you suddenly 35 like a trap. For it will come upon all who reside on the face of the whole earth. 36 But be alert at all times, praying that you may have strength to escape all these things that are going to happen, and to stand before the Son of Man.” 
37 So throughout the days he was teaching in the temple courts,* and throughout the nights he was going out and﻿* spending the night on the hill that is called the Mount of Olives. 38 And all the people were getting up very early in the morning to come﻿* to him in the temple courts﻿* to listen to him. 
The Chief Priests and Scribes Plot to Kill Jesus
22 Now the feast of Unleavened Bread (which is called Passover) was drawing near. 2 And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how they could destroy him, because they were afraid of the people. 
Judas Arranges to Betray Jesus
3 And Satan entered into Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve. 4 And he went away and﻿* discussed with the chief priests and officers of the temple guard how he could betray him to them. 5 And they were delighted, and came to an agreement with him to give him﻿* money. 6 And he agreed, and began looking﻿* for a favorable opportunity to betray him to them apart from the crowd. 
Jesus’ Final Passover with the Disciples
7 And the day of the feast of Unleavened Bread came, on which it was necessary for the Passover lamb to be sacrificed. 8 And he sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and﻿* prepare the Passover for us, so that we may eat it.* 9 So they said to him, “Where do you want us to prepare it?”* 10 And he said to them, “Behold, when﻿* you have entered into the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house which he enters. 11 And you will say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?” ’ 12 And he will show you a large furnished upstairs room. Make preparations there.” 13 So they went and﻿* found everything﻿* just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover. 
The Lord’s Supper
14 And when the hour came, he reclined at the table, and the apostles with him. 15 And he said to them, “⌊I have earnestly desired⌋ to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. 16 For I tell you that I will not eat it until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.” 17 And he took in hand a cup, and﻿* after﻿* giving thanks he said, “Take this and share it﻿* among yourselves. 18 For I tell you, from now on I will not drink of the product of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” 
19 And he took bread, and﻿* after﻿* giving thanks, he broke it﻿* and gave it﻿* to them, saying, “This is my body which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” 20 And in the same way the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood which is poured out for you. 
21 “But behold, the hand of the one who is betraying me is with me on the table! 22 For the Son of Man is going according to what has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!” 23 And they began to debate with one another who then of them it could be who was going to do this. 
A Dispute About Who Is Greatest
24 And a dispute also occurred among them as to which of them was recognized as being greatest. 25 So he said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those who have authority over them are called benefactors. 26 But you are not to be like this! But the one who is greatest among you must become like the youngest, and the one who leads like the one who serves. 27 For who is greater, the one who reclines at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines at the table? But I am in your midst as the one who serves. 
28 “And you are the ones who have remained with me in my trials, 29 and I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred on me, 30 that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and you will sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
Jesus Predicts Peter’s Denial
31 “Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has demanded to sift you like wheat, 32 but I have prayed for you, that your faith may not fail. And you, when﻿* once you have turned back, strengthen your brothers.” 33 But he said to him, “Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death!” 34 And he said, “I tell you, Peter, the rooster will not crow today until you have denied three times that you know me!” 
The Two Swords
35 And he said to them, “When I sent you out without a money bag and a traveler’s bag and sandals, you did not lack anything, did you?”* And they said, “Nothing.” 36 And he said to them, “But now the one who has a money bag must take it,* and likewise a traveler’s bag. And the one who does not have a sword must sell his cloak and buy one. 37 For I tell you that this that is written must be fulfilled in me: ‘And he was counted with the criminals.’ For indeed, what is written﻿* about me ⌊is being fulfilled⌋.” 38 So they said, “Lord, behold, here are two swords!” And he said to them, “It is adequate.” 
The Prayer in Gethsemane
39 And he went away and﻿* proceeded, according to his﻿* custom, to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples also followed him. 40 And when﻿* he came to the place, he said to them, “Pray that you will not enter into temptation.” 41 And he withdrew from them about a stone’s throw and ⌊knelt down⌋ and﻿* began to pray,* 42 saying, “Father, if you are willing, take away this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will but yours be done.” ⟦43 And an angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him. 44 And being in anguish, he began praying﻿* more fervently and his sweat became like drops of blood falling down to the ground.⟧ 45 And when he﻿* got up from the prayer and﻿* came to the disciples, he found them sleeping from sorrow, 46 and he said to them, “Why are you sleeping? Get up and﻿* pray that you will not enter into temptation!” 
The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus
47 While﻿* he was still speaking, behold, there came a crowd, and the one named Judas, one of the twelve, leading them. And he approached Jesus to kiss him. 48 But Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?” 49 And when﻿* those around him saw what was about to happen, they said, “Lord, should we strike with the sword?” 50 And a certain one of them struck the slave of the high priest and cut off his right ear. 51 But Jesus answered and﻿* said, “⌊Stop! No more of this!⌋” And he touched his﻿* ear and﻿* healed him. 52 And Jesus said to the chief priests and officers of the temple and elders who had come out against him, “Have you come out with swords and clubs, as against a robber? 53 Every day when﻿* I was with you in the temple courts,* you did not stretch out your﻿* hands against me! But this is your hour and the domain of darkness!” 
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin
54 And they arrested him and﻿* led him﻿* away and brought him﻿* into the house of the high priest. But Peter was following at a distance. 55 And when they﻿* had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat down among them. 56 And a certain female slave, seeing him sitting in the light and looking intently at him, said, “This man also was with him!” 57 But he denied it,* saying, “Woman, I do not know him!” 58 And after a short time another person saw him and﻿* said, “You also are one of them!” But Peter said, “Man, I am not!” 59 And after﻿* about one hour had passed, someone else was insisting, saying, “In truth this man also was with him, because he is also a Galilean!” 60 But Peter said, “Man, I do not know what you are talking about!” And immediately, while﻿* he was still speaking, a rooster crowed. 61 And the Lord turned around and﻿* looked intently at Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said to him, “Before the rooster crows today, you will deny me three times.” 62 And he went outside and﻿* wept bitterly. 
63 And the men who were guarding him began to mock﻿* him while﻿* they beat him,* 64 and after﻿* blindfolding him they repeatedly asked﻿* him,* saying, “Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?” 65 And they were saying many other things against him, reviling him.* 
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin
66 And when day came, the council of elders of the people gathered, both chief priests and scribes, and they led him away to their Sanhedrin, 67 saying, “If you are the Christ, tell us!” But he said to them, “If I tell you, you will never believe, 68 and if I ask you,* you will never answer! 69 But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.” 70 So they all said, “Are you then the Son of God?” And he said to them, “You say that I am.” 71 And they said, “Why do we have need of further testimony? For we ourselves have heard it﻿* from his mouth!” 
Jesus Brought Before Pilate
23 And the whole assembly of them rose up and﻿* brought him before Pilate. 2 And they began to accuse him, saying, “We have found this man misleading our nation and forbidding us﻿* to pay taxes to Caesar, and saying he himself is Christ, a king!” 3 And Pilate asked him, saying, “Are you the king of the Jews?” And he answered him and﻿* said, “You say so.” 4 So Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, “I find no basis for an accusation against this man.” 5 But they insisted, saying, “He incites the people, teaching throughout the whole of Judea and beginning from Galilee as far as here.” 
Jesus Brought Before Herod
6 Now when﻿* Pilate heard this,* he asked if the man was a Galilean. 7 And when he﻿* found out that he was from the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him over to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days. 8 And when﻿* Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he had been wanting to see him for a long time, because he had heard about him and was hoping to see some miracle performed by him. 9 So he questioned him ⌊at considerable length⌋, but he answered nothing to him. 10 And the chief priests and the scribes were standing there vehemently accusing him. 11 And Herod with his soldiers also treated him with contempt, and after﻿* mocking him﻿* and﻿* dressing him﻿* in glistening clothing, he sent him back to Pilate. 12 And both Herod and Pilate became friends with one another on that same day, ⌊for they had previously been enemies of one another⌋. 
Pilate Releases Barabbas
13 So Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people 14 and﻿* said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was misleading the people, and behold, when I﻿* examined him﻿* before you, I found nothing in this man as basis for the accusation which ⌊you are making⌋ against him. 15 But neither did Herod, because he sent him back to us. And behold, nothing deserving death ⌊has been done⌋ by him. 16 Therefore I will punish him and﻿* release him.”*  18 But they all cried out in unison, saying, “Take this man away, and release for us Barabbas!” 19 (who had been thrown in prison because of a certain insurrection that had taken place in the city, and for murder). 20 And Pilate, wanting to release Jesus, addressed them﻿*﻿ again, 21 but they kept crying out, saying, “Crucify! Crucify him!” 22 So he said to them a third time, “Why? What wrong has this man done? I found no basis for an accusation ⌊deserving death⌋ in him. Therefore I will punish him and﻿* release him.”* 23 But they were urgent, demanding with loud cries that he be crucified. And their cries prevailed. 24 And Pilate decided that their demand should be granted. 25 And he released the one who had been thrown into prison because of insurrection and murder, whom they were asking for, but Jesus he handed over to their will. 
Jesus Is Crucified
26 And as they led him away, they seized Simon, a certain man of Cyrene, who was coming from the country, and﻿* placed the cross on him, to carry it﻿* behind Jesus. 27 And a great crowd of the people were following him, and of women who were mourning and lamenting him. 28 But turning to them, Jesus said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children! 29 For behold, days are coming in which they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that did not give birth, and the breasts that did not nurse!’ 30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us!’ 31 For if they do these things ⌊when the wood is green⌋, what will happen ⌊when it is dry⌋?” 
32 And two other criminals were also led away to be executed with him. 33 And when they came to the place that is called “The Skull,” there they crucified him, and the criminals, the one on his right and the other on his left. 34 ⟦But Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.”⟧ And they cast lots to divide his clothes. 35 And the people stood there watching, but the rulers also ridiculed him,* saying, “He saved others; let him save himself, if this man is the Christ of God, the Chosen One!” 36 And the soldiers also mocked him, coming up and﻿* offering him sour wine 37 and saying, “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself!” 38 And there was also an inscription over him, “This is the king of the Jews.” 
39 And one of the criminals who were hanged there reviled him, saying, “Are you not the Christ? Save yourself—and us!” 40 But the other answered and﻿* rebuked him, saying, “Do you not even fear God, because you are undergoing the same condemnation? 41 And we indeed justly, for we are receiving ⌊what we deserve⌋ for what we have done. But this man has done nothing wrong!” 42 And he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom!” 43 And he said to him, “Truly I say to you, today you will be with me in paradise.” 
Jesus Dies on the Cross
44 And by this time it was about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour 45 because﻿* the light of the sun failed. And the curtain of the temple was torn apart down the middle. 46 And Jesus, calling out with a loud voice, said, “Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit!” And after he﻿* said this, he expired. 
47 Now when﻿* the centurion saw what had happened, he began to praise﻿* God, saying, “Certainly this man was righteous!” 48 And all the crowds that had come together for this spectacle, when they﻿* saw the things that had happened, returned home﻿* beating their﻿* breasts. 49 And all his acquaintances, and the women who had followed him from Galilee who saw these things, stood at a distance. 
Jesus Is Buried
50 And behold, a man ⌊named⌋ Joseph, who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man 51 (this man was not consenting to their plan and deed), from Arimathea, ⌊a Judean town⌋, who was looking forward to the kingdom of God. 52 This man approached Pilate and﻿* asked for the body of Jesus. 53 And he took it﻿* down and﻿* wrapped it in a linen cloth and placed him in a tomb cut into the rock where no one had ever been placed. 54 And it was the day of preparation, and the Sabbath was drawing near. 55 And the women who had been accompanying him from Galilee followed and﻿* saw the tomb and how his body was placed. 56 And they returned and﻿* prepared fragrant spices and perfumes, and on the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment. 
Jesus Is Raised
24 Now on the first day of the week, at very early dawn, they came back to the tomb bringing the fragrant spices which they had prepared. 2 And they found the stone had been rolled away from the tomb, 3 but when they﻿* went in, they did not find the body. 4 And it happened that while they were perplexed about this, behold, two men in gleaming clothing stood near them. 5 And as﻿* they were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground, they said to them, “Why are you looking for the living among the dead? 6 He is not here, but has been raised! Remember how he spoke to you while he﻿* was still in Galilee, 7 saying that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of men who are sinners, and be crucified, and on the third day rise?” 8 And they remembered his words, 9 and when they﻿* returned from the tomb, they reported all these things to the eleven and to all the rest. 10 Now Mary Magdalene and Joanna and Mary the mother of James and the others with them were telling these things to the apostles. 11 And these words appeared to them as nonsense, and they refused to believe them. 12 But Peter got up and﻿* ran to the tomb, and bending over to look, he saw only the strips of linen cloth, and he went away to his home wondering what had happened. 
Jesus Encountered on the Road to Emmaus
13 And behold, on that same day, two of them were traveling to a village ⌊named⌋ Emmaus that was sixty stadia distant from Jerusalem, 14 and they were conversing with one another about all these things that had happened. 15 And it happened that while they were conversing, and discussing, Jesus himself also approached and﻿* began to go along with﻿* them, 16 but their eyes were prevented from recognizing him. 17 And he said to them, “What are these matters that you are discussing with one another as you﻿* are walking along?” And they stood still, looking sad. 18 And one of them, ⌊named⌋ Cleopas, answered and﻿* said to him, “Are you the only one living near Jerusalem and not knowing the things that have happened in it in these days?” 19 And he said to them, “What things?” So they said to him, “The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, a man who was a prophet, powerful in deed and word before God and all the people, 20 and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to a sentence of death, and crucified him. 21 But we were hoping that he was the one who was going to redeem Israel. But in addition to all these things, this is the third day ⌊since⌋ these things took place. 22 But also some women from among us astonished us, who were at the tomb early in the morning, 23 and when they﻿* did not find his body, they came back saying they had seen even a vision of angels, who said that he was alive! 24 And some of those with us went out to the tomb and found it﻿* like this, just as the women had also said, but him they did not see.” 25 And he said to them, “O foolish and slow in heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! 26 Was it not necessary that the Christ suffer these things and enter into his glory?” 27 And beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them the things concerning himself in all the scriptures. 28 And they drew near to the village where they were going, and he acted as though he was going farther. 29 And they urged him strongly, saying, “Stay with us, because it is getting toward evening, and by this time the day is far spent.” And he went in to stay with them. 30 And it happened that when he reclined at the table with them, he took the bread and﻿* gave thanks, and after﻿* breaking it,* he gave it﻿* to them. 31 And their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, and he became invisible to them. 32 And they said to one another, “Were not our hearts burning within us while he was speaking with us on the road, while he was explaining the scriptures to us?” 33 And they got up that same hour and﻿* returned to Jerusalem and found the eleven and those with them assembled, 34 saying, “The Lord has really been raised, and has appeared to Simon!” 35 And they began describing﻿* ⌊what happened⌋ on the road, and how he was recognized by them in the breaking of the bread. 
Jesus Appears to His Disciples
36 And while﻿* they were saying these things, he himself stood there among them. 37 But they were startled and became terrified, and﻿* thought they had seen a ghost. 38 And he said to them, “Why are you frightened? And for what reason do doubts arise in your hearts? 39 Look at my hands and my feet, that I am I myself! Touch me and see, because a ghost does not have flesh and bones, as ⌊you see that I have⌋.” 40 And when he﻿* had said this, he showed them his﻿* hands and his﻿* feet. 41 And while﻿* they were still disbelieving because of joy and were marveling, he said to them, “Do you have anything ⌊to eat⌋ here?” 42 So they gave him a piece of broiled fish, 43 and he took it﻿* and﻿* ate it﻿* in front of them. 
Jesus Commissions His Disciples
44 And he said to them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I﻿* was still with you, that everything that is written about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and psalms must be fulfilled.” 45 Then he opened their minds to understand the scriptures, 46 and said to them, “Thus it is written that the Christ would suffer and would rise from the dead on the third day, 47 and repentance and the forgiveness of sins would be proclaimed in his name to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem. 48 You are witnesses of these things. 49 And behold, I am sending out what was promised by my Father upon you, but you stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.” 
The Ascension
50 And he led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he blessed them. 51 And it happened that while he was blessing them, he parted from them and was taken up into heaven. 52 And they worshiped him and﻿* returned to Jerusalem with great joy. 53 And they were ⌊continually⌋ in the temple courts﻿* praising God.

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN
 
The Prologue to John’s Gospel
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 2 This one was in the beginning with God. 3 All things came into being through him, and apart from him not one thing came into being that has come into being. 4 In him was life, and the life was the light of humanity. 5 And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not overcome it. 
6 A man came, sent from God, ⌊whose name was⌋ John. 7 This one came for a witness, in order that he could testify about the light, so that all would believe through him. 8 That one was not the light, but came in order that he could testify about the light. 9 The true light, who gives light to every person, was coming into the world. 10 He was in the world, and the world came into being through him, and the world did not recognize him. 11 He came to his own things, and his own people did not receive him. 12 But as many as received him—to those who believe in his name—he gave to them authority to become children of God, 13 who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of a husband, but of God. 
14 And the Word became flesh and took up residence among us, and we saw his glory, glory as of the one and only from the Father, full of grace and truth. 15 John testified about him and cried out, saying, “This one was he about whom I said, ‘The one who comes after me is ahead of me, because he existed before me.’ ” 16 For from his fullness we have all received, and grace after grace. 17 For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came about through Jesus Christ. 18 No one has seen God at any time; the one and only, God, the one who is in the bosom of the Father—that one has made him﻿* known. 
John the Baptist Testifies to Jesus
19 And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem so that they could ask him, “Who are you?” 20 And he confessed—and he did not deny, and confessed—“I am not the Christ!” 21 And they asked him, “Then who are you? Are you Elijah?” And he said, “I am not!” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered, “No!” 22 Then they said to him, “Who are you, so that we can give an answer to those who sent us? What do you say about yourself?” 
23 He said, 
“I am ‘the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, 
“Make straight the way of the Lord,” ’ 
just as Isaiah the prophet said.” 24 (And they had been sent from the Pharisees.) 25 And they asked him and said to him, “Why then are you baptizing, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?” 
26 John answered them, saying, “I baptize with water. In your midst stands one whom you do not know—27 the one who comes after me, of whom I am not worthy ⌊to untie⌋ the strap of his sandal!” 28 These things took place in Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was baptizing. 
29 On the next day he saw Jesus coming to him and said, “Look! The Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world! 30 This one is the one about whom I said, ‘After me is coming a man who is ahead of me, because he existed before me.’ 31 And I did not know him, but in order that he could be revealed to Israel, because of this I came baptizing with water.” 
32 And John testified, saying, “I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove from heaven and remaining upon him. 33 And I did not know him, but the one who sent me to baptize with water, that one said to me, ‘The one upon whom you see the Spirit descending and remaining upon him—this one is the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ 34 And I have seen and testify that this one is the Chosen One of God. 
Two of John’s Disciples Follow Jesus
35 On the next day again John was standing there,* and two of his disciples, 36 and looking at Jesus as he﻿* was walking by, he said, “Look! The Lamb of God!” 37 And the two disciples heard him speaking, and they followed Jesus. 38 And Jesus, turning around and seeing them following him,* said to them, “What do you seek?” And they said to him, “Rabbi” (which means when﻿* translated “Teacher”), “where are you staying?” 39 He said to them, “Come and you will see!” So they came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day (it was about the tenth hour). 
Andrew Declares Jesus to be the Messiah
40 Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard John and followed him. 41 This one first found his own brother Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah!” (which is translated “Christ”). 42 He brought him to Jesus. Looking at him, Jesus said, “You are Simon the son of John. You will be called Cephas” (which is interpreted “Peter”). 
Jesus Calls Philip and Nathanael
43 On the next day he wanted to depart for Galilee, and he found Philip. And Jesus said to him, “Follow me!” 44 (Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the town of Andrew and Peter.) 45 Philip found Nathanael and said to him, “We have found the one whom Moses wrote about in the law, and the prophets wrote about—Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth!” 46 And Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see!” 
47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said about him, “Look! ⌊A true Israelite⌋ in whom is no deceit!” 48 Nathanael said to him, “From where do you know me?” Jesus answered and said to him, “Before Philip called you, when you﻿* were under the fig tree, I saw you.” 49 Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are the king of Israel!” 50 Jesus answered and said to him, “Because I said to you that I saw you under the fig tree, do you believe? You will see greater things than these!” 51 And he said to him, “Truly, truly I say to all of you, you will see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.” 
The Wedding at Cana: Water Turned into Wine
2 And on the third day, there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there. 2 And both Jesus and his disciples were invited to the wedding. 3 And when the﻿* wine ran out, the mother of Jesus said to him, “They have no wine!” 4 And Jesus said to her, “What ⌊does your concern have to do with me⌋, woman? My hour has not yet come.” 5 His mother said to the servants, “Whatever he says to you, do it!”* 
6 Now six stone water jars were set there, in accordance with the ceremonial cleansing of the Jews, each holding two or three measures. 7 Jesus said to them, “Fill the water jars with water.” And they filled them to the brim. 8 And he said to them, “Now draw some﻿* out and take it﻿* to the head steward. So they took it.* 9 Now when the head steward tasted the water which had become wine and did not know where it was from—but the servants who had drawn the water knew—the head steward summoned the bridegroom 10 and said to him, “⌊Everyone⌋ serves the good wine first, and whenever they are drunk, the inferior. You have kept the good wine until now!” 11 This beginning of signs Jesus performed at Cana in Galilee, and revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him. 
Jesus’ First Journey to Jerusalem
12 After this he went down to Capernaum, and his mother and brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there ⌊a few⌋ days. 13 And the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
The Cleansing of the Temple
14 And he found in the temple courts﻿* those who were selling oxen and sheep and doves, and the money changers seated. 15 And he made a whip of cords and﻿* drove them﻿* all out of the temple courts,* both the sheep and the oxen, and he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their﻿* tables. 16 And to the ones selling the doves he said, “Take these things away from here! Do not make my Father’s house ⌊a marketplace⌋!” 17 His disciples remembered that it is written, “Zeal for your house will consume me.” 
18 So the Jews answered and said to him, “What sign do you show to us, because you are doing these things?” 19 Jesus answered and said to them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up!” 20 Then the Jews said, “This temple has been under construction forty-six years, and will you raise it up in three days?” 21 But he was speaking about the temple of his body. 22 So when he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the scripture and the saying that Jesus had spoken. 
Jesus at the Passover
23 Now while he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the feast, many believed in his name because they﻿* saw his signs which he was doing. 24 But Jesus himself did not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people, 25 and because he did not ⌊need⌋ anyone ⌊to testify⌋ about man, for he himself knew what was in man.* 
A Meeting with Nicodemus
3 Now there was a man of the Pharisees ⌊whose name was⌋ Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. 2 This man came to him at night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are﻿* a teacher who has come from God, for no one is able to perform these signs that you are performing unless God were with him.” 3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Truly, truly I say to you, unless someone is born from above, he is not able to see the kingdom of God.” 4 Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is an old man? He is not able to enter into his mother’s womb for the second time and be born, can he?”* 
5 Jesus answered, “Truly, truly I say to you, unless someone is born of water and spirit, he is not able to enter into the kingdom of God. 6 What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit is spirit. 7 Do not be astonished that I said to you, ‘It is necessary for you to be born from above.’ 8 The wind blows wherever it wishes, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit.” 
9 Nicodemus answered and said to him, “How can these things be?” 10 Jesus answered and said to him, “Are you the teacher of Israel, and you do not understand these things? 11 Truly, truly I say to you, we speak what we know, and we testify about what we have seen, and you do not accept our testimony! 12 If I tell you earthly things and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things? 13 And no one has ascended into heaven except the one who descended from heaven—the Son of Man. 14 And just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, thus it is necessary that the Son of Man be lifted up, 15 so that everyone who believes in him will have eternal life.” 
God’s Love for the World
16 For in this way God loved the world, so that he gave his one and only Son, in order that everyone who believes in him will not perish, but will have eternal life. 17 For God did not send his Son into the world in order that he should judge the world, but in order that the world should be saved through him. 18 The one who believes in him is not judged, but the one who does not believe has already been judged, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God. 19 And this is the judgment: that the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil. 20 For everyone who practices evil hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his deeds be exposed. 21 But the one who practices the truth comes to the light, in order that his deeds may be revealed, that they are done in God. 
Additional Testimony by John the Baptist About Jesus
22 After these things Jesus and his disciples came into Judean territory, and there he spent time with them and was baptizing. 23 Now John was also baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because water was plentiful there, and they were coming and were being baptized. 24 (For John had not yet been thrown into prison.) 
25 So a dispute occurred on the part of John’s disciples with a Jew concerning purification. 26 And they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, he who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, about whom you testified—look, this one is baptizing, and all are coming to him!” 
27 John answered and said, “A man can receive not one thing unless it is granted to him from heaven! 28 You yourselves testify about me that I said, ‘I am not the Christ, but I am sent before that one.’ 29 The one who has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices ⌊greatly⌋ because of the bridegroom’s voice. So this joy of mine is complete. 30 It is necessary for that one to increase, but for me to decrease.” 
31 The one who comes from above is over all. The one who is from the earth is from the earth and speaks from the earth; the one who comes from heaven is over all. 32 What he has seen and heard, this he testifies, and no one accepts his testimony. 33 The one who accepts his testimony has attested that God is true. 34 For the one whom God sent speaks the words of God, for he does not give the Spirit by measure. 35 The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand. 36 The one who believes in the Son has eternal life, but the one who disobeys the Son will not see life—but the wrath of God remains on him. 
The Samaritan Woman at Jacob’s Well
4 Now when Jesus knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 2 (although Jesus himself was not baptizing, but his disciples), 3 he left Judea and departed again for Galilee. 4 And it was necessary for him to go through Samaria. 
5 Now he came to a town of Samaria called Sychar, near the piece of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph. 6 And Jacob’s well was there, so Jesus, because he had become tired from the journey, simply sat down at the well. It was about the sixth hour. 
7 A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, “Give me water﻿* to drink.” 8 (For his disciples had gone away into the town so that they could buy food.) 9 So the Samaritan woman said to him, “How do you, being a Jew, ask from me water﻿* to drink, since I﻿* am a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.) 
10 Jesus answered and said to her, “If you had known the gift of God and who it is who says to you, ‘Give me water﻿* to drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.” 11 The woman said to him, “Sir, you have no bucket and the well is deep! From where then do you get this living water? 12 You are not greater than our father Jacob, are you,* who gave us the well and drank from it himself, and his sons and his livestock?” 
13 Jesus answered and said to her, “Everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again. 14 But whoever drinks of this water which I will give to him will never be thirsty for eternity, but the water which I will give to him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.” 15 The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water, so that I will not be thirsty or come here to draw water!”* 16 He said to her, “Go, call your husband and come here.” 17 The woman answered and said to him, “I do not have a husband.” Jesus said to her, “You have said rightly, ‘I do not have a husband,’ 18 for you have had five husbands, and the one whom you have now is not your husband; this you have said truthfully!” 
19 The woman said to him, “Sir, I see that you are a prophet. 20 Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and you people﻿* say that in Jerusalem is the place where it is necessary to worship.” 21 Jesus said to her, “Believe me, woman, that an hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father. 22 You worship what you do not know. We worship what we know, because salvation is from the Jews. 23 But an hour is coming—and now is here﻿*—when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for indeed the Father seeks such people to be his worshipers. 24 God is spirit, and the ones who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.” 25 The woman said to him, “I know that Messiah is coming” (the one called Christ); “whenever that one comes, he will proclaim all things to us.” 26 Jesus said to her, “I, the one speaking to you, am he.* 
The Disciples and the Harvest
27 And at this point﻿* his disciples came, and they were astonished that he was speaking with a woman. However, no one said, “What do you seek?” or “Why are you speaking with her?” 28 So the woman left her water jar and went away into the town and said to the people, 29 “Come, see a man who told me everything I have ever done! Perhaps this one is the Christ?” 30 They went out from the town and were coming to him. 
31 In the meanwhile the disciples were asking him, saying, “Rabbi, eat something!”* 32 But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you do not know about.” 33 So the disciples began to say﻿* to one another, “No one brought him anything﻿* to eat, did they?”* 34 Jesus said to them, “My food is that I do the will of the one who sent me and complete his work. 35 Do you not say, ‘There are yet four months and the harvest comes’? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes and look at the fields, that they are white for harvest already. 36 The one who reaps receives wages and gathers fruit for eternal life, in order that the one who sows and the one who reaps can rejoice together. 37 For in this instance﻿* the saying is true, ‘It is one who sows and another who reaps.’ 38 I sent you to reap what you did not work for; others have worked, and you have entered into their work.” 
The Samaritans and the Savior of the World
39 Now from that town many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the word of the woman who testified, “He told me everything that I have done.” 40 So when the Samaritans came to him, they began asking﻿* him to stay with them. And he stayed there two days. 41 And many more believed because of his word, 42 And they were saying to the woman, “No longer because of ⌊what you said⌋ do we believe, for we ourselves have heard, and we know that this one is truly the Savior of the world!” 
Return to Galilee
43 And after the two days he departed from there into Galilee. 44 For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own homeland. 45 So when he came to Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, because they﻿* had seen all the things he had done in Jerusalem at the feast (for they themselves had also come to the feast). 
A Royal Official’s Son Is Healed
46 Now he came again to Cana in Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And there was at Capernaum a certain royal official whose son was sick. 47 This man, when he﻿* heard that Jesus had come from Judea into Galilee, went to him and asked that he come down and heal his son, for he was about to die. 48 So Jesus said to him, “Unless you people﻿* see signs and wonders, you will never believe!” 49 The royal official said to him, “Sir, come down before my child dies!” 50 Jesus said to him, “Go, your son will live.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he departed. 
51 Now as﻿* he was going down, his slaves met him, saying that his child was alive. 52 So he inquired from them the hour at which he had gotten better. Then they said to him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.” 53 So the father knew that it was that same hour at which Jesus said to him, “Your son will live,” and he himself believed, and his whole household. 54 Now this is again a second sign Jesus performed when he﻿* came from Judea into Galilee. 
A Paralytic Is Healed
5 After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2 Now there is in Jerusalem near the Sheep Gate a pool called in Aramaic Bethzatha, which has five porticoes. 3 In these were lying a large number of those who were sick, blind, lame, paralyzed. 5 And a certain man was there who had been thirty-eight years in his sickness. 6 Jesus, when he﻿* saw this one lying there and knew that he had been sick﻿* a long time already, said to him, “Do you want to become well?” 7 The one who was sick answered him, “Sir, I do not have anyone that, whenever the water is stirred up, could put me into the pool. But ⌊while⌋ I am coming, another goes down before me.” 8 Jesus said to him, “Get up! Pick up your mat and walk!” 9 And immediately the man became well and picked up his mat and began to walk.* (Now it was the Sabbath on that day.) 
10 So the Jews were saying to the one who had been healed, “It is the Sabbath, and it is not permitted for you to pick up the mat!” 11 But he answered them, “The one who made me well—that one said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk!’ ” 12 So they asked him, “Who is the man who said to you, ‘Pick up your mat﻿* and walk?’ ” 13 But the one who was healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn while﻿* a crowd was in the place. 
Equal with God
14 After these things Jesus found him at the temple and said to him, “Look, you have become well! Sin no longer, lest something worse happen to you.” 15 The man went and reported to the Jews that Jesus was the one who made him well. 16 And on account of this the Jews began to persecute﻿* Jesus, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath. 17 But he answered them, “My Father is working until now, and I am working.” 18 So on account of this the Jews were seeking even more to kill him, because he not only was breaking the Sabbath, but also was calling God his own Father, thus﻿* making himself equal with God. 
The Authority of the Son
19 So Jesus answered and said to them, “Truly, truly I say to you, the Son can do nothing from himself except what he sees the Father doing. For whatever that one does, these things also the Son does likewise. 20 For the Father loves the Son and shows him everything that he himself is doing. And greater works than these he will show him, so that you will be astonished. 21 For just as the Father raises the dead and makes them﻿* alive, thus also the Son makes alive whomever he wishes. 22 For the Father does not judge anyone, but he has given all judgment to the Son, 23 in order that all people﻿* will honor the Son, just as they honor the Father. The one who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him. 24 Truly, truly I say to you that the one who hears my word and who believes the one who sent me has eternal life, and does not come into judgment, but has passed from death into life. 
25 “Truly, truly I say to you, that an hour is coming—and now is here—when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and the ones who hear will live. 26 For just as the Father has life in himself, thus also he has granted to the Son to have life in himself. 27 And he has granted him authority to carry out judgment, because he is the Son of Man. 
28 “Do not be astonished at this, because an hour is coming in which all those in the tombs will hear his voice 29 and they will come out—those who have done good things to a resurrection of life, but those who have practiced evil things to a resurrection of judgment. 30 I am able to do nothing from myself. Just as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I do not seek my own will, but the will of the one who sent me. 
Further Testimony About the Son
31 “If I testify about myself, my testimony is not true. 32 There is another who testifies about me, and I know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true. 33 You have sent to John and he has testified to the truth. 34 (And I do not receive testimony from people, but I say these things in order that you may be saved.) 35 That one was the lamp which was burning and shining, and you wanted to rejoice for an hour in his light. 
36 “But I have a testimony greater than John’s, for the works which the Father has given to me that I should complete them—the very works which I am doing—these testify about me, that the Father has sent me. 37 And the Father who sent me, that one has testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time nor seen his form. 38 And you do not have his word residing in yourselves, because the one whom that one sent, in this one you do not believe. 39 You search the scriptures because you think that you have eternal life in them, and it is these that testify about me. 40 And you are not willing to come to me so that you may have life. 
41 “I do not accept glory from people, 42 but I know you, that you do not have the love of God in yourselves. 43 I have come in my Father’s name, and you do not accept me. If another should come in his own name, you would accept that one! 44 How are you able to believe, if you﻿* accept glory from one another, and do not seek the glory which is from the only God? 45 Do not think that I will accuse you before the Father! The one who accuses you is Moses, in whom you have put your hope! 46 For if you had believed Moses, you would believe me, for that one wrote about me. 47 But if you do not believe that one’s writings, how will you believe my words?” 
The Feeding of Five Thousand
6 After these things Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee (that is, Tiberias). 2 And a large crowd was following him because they were observing the signs that he was doing on those who were sick. 3 So Jesus went up on the mountain and sat down there with his disciples. 4 (Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.) 5 ⌊Then Jesus, when he looked up⌋ * and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, said to Philip, “Where can we buy bread so that these people can eat?” 6 (Now he said this to test him, because he knew what he was going to do.) 7 Philip replied to him, “Two hundred denarii worth of bread would not be enough for them, in order that each one could receive a little.” 8 One of his disciples, Andrew the brother of Simon Peter, said to him, 9 “Here is a boy who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are these for so many people?” 10 Jesus said, “Make the people recline.” (Now there was a lot of grass in the place.) So the men reclined, approximately five thousand in number. 11 Then Jesus took the bread, and after he﻿* had given thanks, he distributed it﻿* to those who were reclining—likewise also of the fish, as much as they wanted. 12 And when they were satisfied, he said to his disciples, “Gather the remaining fragments so that nothing is lost.” 13 So they gathered them,* and filled twelve baskets with fragments from the five barley loaves which were left over by those who had eaten. 
14 Now when﻿* the people saw the sign that he performed, they began to say,* “This one is truly the Prophet who is to come into the world!” 15 Then Jesus, because he﻿* knew that they were about to come and seize him in order to make him﻿* king, withdrew again up the mountain by himself alone. 
Jesus Walks on the Water
16 Now when evening came, his disciples went down to the sea. 17 And getting into a boat, they began to go﻿* to the other side of the sea, to Capernaum. And it had already become dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them. 18 And the sea began to be stirred up﻿* because﻿* a strong wind was blowing. 19 Then when they﻿* had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they were afraid. 20 But he said to them, “It is I! Do not be afraid!” 21 So they were wanting to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat came to the land to which they were going. 
Discourse About the Bread of Life
22 On the next day, the crowd that was on the other side of the sea saw that other boats were not there (except one), and that Jesus had not entered with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples had departed alone. 23 Other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after﻿* the Lord had given thanks. 24 So when the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and came to Capernaum seeking Jesus. 
25 And when they﻿* found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?” 26 Jesus replied to them and said, “Truly, truly I say to you, you seek me not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves and were satisfied! 27 Do not work for the food that perishes, but the food that remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For God the Father has set his seal on this one.” 
28 So they said to him, “What shall we do that we can accomplish the works of God?” 29 Jesus answered and said to them, “This is the work of God: that you believe in the one whom that one sent.” 30 So they said to him, “Then what sign will you perform, so that we can see it﻿* and believe you? What will you do? 31 Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’ 
32 Then Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly I say to you, Moses did not give you bread from heaven, but my Father is giving you the true bread from heaven! 33 For the bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” 34 So they said to him, “Sir, always give us this bread!” 
35 Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life. The one who comes to me will never be hungry, and the one who believes in me will never be thirsty again. 36 But I said to you that you have seen me and do not believe. 37 Everyone whom the Father gives to me will come to me, and the one who comes to me I will never throw out, 38 because I have come down from heaven not that I should do my will, but the will of the one who sent me. 39 Now this is the will of the one who sent me: that everyone whom he has given me, I would not lose any of them, but raise them up on the last day. 40 For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who looks at the Son and believes in him would have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.” 
41 Now the Jews began to grumble﻿* about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven,” 42 and they were saying, “Is this one not Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How does he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” 43 Jesus answered and said to them, “Do not grumble ⌊among yourselves⌋! 44 No one is able to come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day. 45 It is written in the prophets, ‘And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who hears from the Father and learns comes to me. 46 (Not that anyone has seen the Father except the one who is from God—this one has seen the Father.) 47 Truly, truly I say to you, the one who believes has eternal life. 48 I am the bread of life. 49 Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and they died. 50 This is the bread that comes down from heaven so that someone may eat from it and not die. 51 I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats from this bread, he will live ⌊forever⌋. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.” 
52 So the Jews began to quarrel﻿* ⌊among themselves⌋, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” 53 Then Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you do not have life in yourselves! 54 The one who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day. 55 For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink. 56 The one who eats﻿* my flesh and drinks my blood resides in me and I in him. 57 Just as the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so also the one who eats﻿* me—that one will live because of me. 58 This is the bread that came down from heaven, not as the fathers ate and died. The one who eats﻿* this bread will live ⌊forever⌋.” 
Many of Jesus’ Disciples Offended by His Teaching
59 He said these things while﻿* teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum. 60 Thus many of his disciples, when they﻿* heard it,* said, “This saying is hard! Who can understand it?” 61 But Jesus, because he﻿* knew within himself that his disciples were grumbling about this, said to them, “Does this cause you to be offended? 62 Then what if you see the Son of Man ascending where he was before? 63 The Spirit is the one who gives life; the flesh profits nothing. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and are life. 64 But there are some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who did not believe, and who it was who would betray him.) 65 And he said, “Because of this I said to you that no one can come to me unless it has been granted to him by the Father.” 
Peter’s Confession
66 For this reason many of his disciples ⌊drew back⌋ and were not walking with him any longer. 67 So Jesus said to the twelve, “You do not want to go away also, do you?”* 68 Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life. 69 And we have believed, and have come to know, that you are the Holy One of God.” 70 Jesus replied to them, “Did I not choose you, the twelve, and one of you is the devil?” 71 (Now he was speaking about Judas son of Simon Iscariot, because this one—one of the twelve—was going to betray him.) 
Jesus’ Brothers Do Not Believe in Him
7 And after these things Jesus was going about in Galilee. For he did not want to go about in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill him. 2 Now the feast of the Jews—the feast of Tabernacles—was near. 3 So his brothers said to him, “Depart from here and go to Judea, so that your disciples also can see your works that you are doing. 4 For no one does anything in secret and yet he himself desires to be ⌊publicly recognized⌋. If you are doing these things, reveal yourself to the world!” 5 (For not even his brothers believed in him.) 
Jesus at the Feast of Tabernacles
6 So Jesus said to them, “My time has not yet come, but your time is always ready. 7 The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, because I am testifying about it, that its deeds are evil. 8 You go up to the feast. I am not going up to this feast, because my time is not yet completed. 9 And when he﻿* had said these things, he remained in Galilee. 
10 But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not openly, but (as it were) in secret. 11 So the Jews were looking for him at the feast, and were saying, “Where is he?” 12 And there was a lot of grumbling concerning him among the crowds; some were saying, “He is a good man,” but others were saying, “No, but he deceives the crowd.” 13 However, no one was speaking openly about him for fear of the Jews. 
14 ⌊Now when the feast was already half over⌋, Jesus went to the temple courts﻿* and began to teach.* 15 Then the Jews were astonished, saying, “How does this man ⌊possess knowledge⌋, because he﻿* has not been taught?” 16 So Jesus answered them and said, “My teaching is not mine, but is from the one who sent me. 17 If anyone wants to do his will, he will know about my﻿* teaching, whether it is from God or I am speaking from myself. 18 The one who speaks from himself seeks his own glory. But the one who seeks the glory of the one who sent him—this one is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. 19 Has not Moses given you the law, and none of you carries out the law? Why do you seek to kill me?” 
20 The crowd replied, “You have a demon! Who is seeking to kill you?” 21 Jesus answered and said to them, “I performed one work, and you are all astonished. 22 Because of this Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers), and you circumcise a man on the Sabbath. 23 If a man receives circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses would not be broken, are you angry with me because I made a whole man well on the Sabbath? 24 Do not judge according to outward appearance, but judge according to righteous judgment!” 
Is Jesus the Christ?
25 Then some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem began to say,* “Is this not the one whom they are seeking to kill? 26 And behold, he is speaking openly and they are saying nothing to him! Can it be that the rulers truly know that this man is the Christ? 27 Yet we know where this man is from, but the Christ, whenever he comes—no one knows where he is from!” 
28 Then Jesus cried out in the temple courts,* teaching and saying, “You both know me and you know where I am from! And I have not come from myself, but the one who sent me is true, whom you do not know. 29 I know him, because I am from him and he sent me.” 
30 So they were seeking to seize him, and no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. 31 But from the crowd many believed in him and were saying, “Whenever the Christ comes, he will not perform more signs than this man has done, will he?”* 
32 The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers in order ⌊to take him into custody ⌋. 33 Then Jesus said, “Yet a little time I am with you, and I am going to the one who sent me. 34 You will seek me and will not find me,*  and where I am, you cannot come.” 
35 So the Jews said to one another, “Where is this one going to go, that we will not find him? He is not going to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, is he?* 36 What is this saying that he said, ‘You will seek me and will not find me,*  and where I am, you cannot come’?” 
The Promise of the Spirit
37 Now on the last day of the feast—the great day—Jesus stood and cried out, saying, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me, and let him drink, 38 the one who believes in me. Just as the scripture said, ‘Out of his belly will flow rivers of living water.’ ” 39 Now he said this concerning the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were about to receive. For the Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.) 
Different Opinions About Jesus
40 Then, when they﻿* heard these words, some from the crowd began to say,* “This man is truly the Prophet!” 41 Others were saying, “This man is the Christ!” But others were saying, “No, for the Christ does not come from Galilee, does he?* 42 Has not the scripture said that the Christ comes from the descendants of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?” 43 So there was a division in the crowd because of him. 44 And some of them were wanting to seize him, but no one laid hands on him. 
45 So the officers came to the chief priests and Pharisees. And they said to them, “⌊Why⌋ did you not bring him?” 46 The officers replied, “Never has a man spoken like this!” 47 Then the Pharisees replied to them, “You have not also been deceived, have you?* 48 ⌊None⌋ of the rulers or of the Pharisees have believed in him, have they?* 49 But this crowd who does not know the law is accursed!” 
50 Nicodemus, the one who came to him previously—who was one of them—said to them, 51 “Our law does not condemn a man unless it first hears from him and knows what he is doing, does it?”* 52 They answered and said to him, “You are not also from Galilee, are you?* Investigate and see that a prophet does not arise from Galilee!” ⟦53 And each one went to his own house. 
A Woman Caught in Adultery
8 But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 2 Now early in the morning he came again to the temple courts.* And all the people were coming, and he sat down and﻿* began to teach﻿* them. 
3 Now the scribes and the Pharisees brought to him a woman caught in adultery. And standing her in their midst, 4 they said to him, testing him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery! 5 Now in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such women. So what do you say?” 6 (Now they were saying this to test him, so that they would have an occasion﻿* to bring charges against him.) But Jesus, bending down, began to write﻿* with his﻿* finger on the ground, taking no notice. 7 And when they persisted in asking him, straightening up he said to them, “The one of you without sin, let him throw the first stone at her!” 8 And bending down again, he wrote on the ground. 9 Now when they﻿* heard it,* being convicted by their conscience, they began to depart,* one by one, beginning with the older ones, and Jesus was left alone—and the woman who was in their midst. 10 So Jesus, straightening up and seeing no one except the woman, said to her, “Where are those accusers of yours? Does no one condemn you?” 11 And she said, “No one, Lord.” So Jesus said, “Neither do I condemn you. Go, and sin no more.”⟧ 
Jesus, the Light of the World
12 Then Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world! The one who follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.” 13 So the Pharisees said to him, “You testify concerning yourself! Your testimony is not true.” 14 Jesus answered and said to them, “Even if I testify concerning myself, my testimony is true, because I know where I have come from and where I am going. But you do not know where I have come from or where I am going. 15 You judge according to externals; I do not judge anyone. 16 But even if I judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father who sent me. 17 And even in your law it is written that the testimony of two men is true. 18 I am the one who testifies concerning myself, and the Father who sent me testifies concerning me.” 
19 So they were saying to him, “Where is your father?” Jesus replied, “You know neither me nor my Father! If you had known me, you would have known my Father also.” 20 He spoke these words by the treasury while﻿* teaching in the temple courts,* and no one seized him, because his hour had not yet come. 
Jesus Predicts His Death
21 So he said to them again, “I am going away, and you will seek me and will die in your sin. Where I am going you cannot come!” 22 Then the Jews began to say,* “Perhaps he will kill himself, because he is saying, ‘Where I am going you cannot come.’ ” 23 And he said to them, “You are from below; I am from above. You are from this world; I am not from this world. 24 Thus I said to you that you will die in your sins. For if you do not believe that I am he, you will die in your sins.” 
25 So they began to say to him,* “Who are you?” Jesus said to them, “⌊What⌋ I have been saying to you from the beginning. 26 I have many things to say and to judge concerning you, but the one who sent me is true, and the things which I heard from him, these things I say to the world.” 27 (They did not know that he was speaking to them about the Father.) 
28 Then Jesus said, “When you lift up the Son of Man, then you will recognize that I am he, and I do nothing from myself, but just as the Father taught me, I say these things. 29 And the one who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone, because I always do the things that are pleasing to him.” 30 While﻿* he was saying these things, many believed in him. 
The Truth Will Set You Free
31 Then Jesus said to those Jews who had believed him, “If you continue in my word you are truly my disciples, 32 and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” 33 They replied to him, “We are descendants of Abraham and have not been enslaved to anyone at any time. How do you say, ‘You will become free’?” 34 Jesus replied to them, “Truly, truly I say to you, that everyone who commits sin is a slave of sin. 35 And the slave does not remain in the household ⌊forever⌋; the son remains ⌊forever⌋. 36 So if the son sets you free, you will be truly free. 37 I know that you are descendants of Abraham. But you are seeking to kill me, because my word makes no progress among you. 38 I speak the things that I have seen with the Father; so also you do the things that you have heard from the Father.” 
The Priority of Jesus Over Abraham
39 They answered and said to him, “Abraham is our father!” Jesus said to them, “If you are children of Abraham, do the deeds of Abraham! 40 But now you are seeking to kill me, a man who spoke to you the truth which I heard from God. This Abraham did not do. 41 You are doing the deeds of your father!” 
They said to him, “We were not born from sexual immorality! We have one father, God!” 42 Jesus said to them, “If God were your father, you would love me, for I have come forth from God and have come. For I have not come from myself, but that one sent me. 43 ⌊Why⌋ do you not understand my way of speaking? Because you are not able to listen to my message. 44 You are of your father the devil, and you want to do the desires of your father! That one was a murderer from the beginning, and does not stand firm in the truth, because truth is not in him. Whenever he speaks the lie, he speaks from his own nature,* because he is a liar and the father ⌊of lies⌋. 45 But because I am telling the truth, you do not believe me. 46 Who among you convicts me concerning sin? If I am telling the truth, ⌊why⌋ do you not believe me? 47 The one who is from God listens to the words of God. Because of this you do not listen—because you are not of God.” 
48 The Jews answered and said to him, “Do we not correctly say that you are a Samaritan and have a demon?” 49 Jesus replied, “I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me! 50 But I do not seek my own glory. There is one who seeks and judges! 51 Truly, truly I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never experience death ⌊forever⌋.” 
52 The Jews said to him, “Now we know that you have a demon! Abraham and the prophets died, and you say, ‘If anyone keeps my word, he will never taste death ⌊forever⌋.’ 53 You are not greater than our father Abraham who died, are you?* And the prophets died! Who do you make yourself to be?” 54 Jesus replied, “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. The one who glorifies me is my Father, about whom you say, ‘He is our God.’ 55 And you have not known him, but I know him. And if I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you! But I know him and I keep his word. 56 Abraham your father rejoiced that he would see my day, and he saw it﻿* and was glad.” 
57 So the Jews said to him, “⌊You are⌋ not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?” 58 Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly I say to you, before Abraham was, I am!” 59 Then they picked up stones in order to throw them﻿* at him. But Jesus was hidden and went out of the temple courts.* 
A Man Born Blind Is Given Sight
9 And as he﻿* went away, he saw a man blind from birth. 2 And his disciples asked him, saying, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be born blind?” 3 Jesus replied, “Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it happened﻿* so that the works of God could be revealed in him. 4 It is necessary for us to do the deeds of the one who sent me while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work! 5 While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.” 6 When he﻿* had said these things, he spat on the ground and made clay with the saliva, and smeared the clay on his eyes. 7 And he said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (which is translated “sent”). So he went and washed and came back seeing. 
8 Then the neighbors and those who saw him previously (because he was a beggar) began to say,* “Is this man not the one who used to sit and beg?” 9 Others were saying, “It is this man”; others were saying, “No, but he is like him.” That one was saying, “I am he!” 10 So they began to say﻿* to him, “How were your eyes opened?” 11 He replied, “The man who is called Jesus made clay and smeared it﻿* on my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash!’ So I went, and I washed, and﻿* I received sight.” 12 And they said to him, “Where is that man?” He said, “I do not know.” 
The Reaction of the Pharisees to the Healing
13 They brought him—the one formerly blind—to the Pharisees. 14 (Now the day on which Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes was the Sabbath.) 15 So the Pharisees also were asking him again how he received sight. And he said to them, “He put clay on my eyes, and I washed, and I see.” 16 So some of the Pharisees were saying, “This man is not from God, because he does not observe the Sabbath!” Others were saying, “How can a man who is a sinner perform such signs?” And there was a division among them. 17 So they said to the blind man again, “What do you say about him, because he opened your eyes?” And he said, “He is a prophet.” 
18 So the Jews did not believe concerning him that he had been blind and received sight, until they summoned the parents of the one who received sight. 19 And they asked them, saying, “Is this man your son, whom you say was born blind? Then how does he now see?” 20 So his parents answered and said, “We know that this man is our son, and that he was born blind. 21 But how he now sees we do not know, or who opened his eyes we do not know. Ask him! ⌊He is a mature adult⌋; he will speak for himself!” 22 (His parents said these things because they were afraid of the Jews, for the Jews had already decided that if anyone should confess him to be Christ, he would be expelled from the synagogue. 23 Because of this his parents said, “⌊He is a mature adult⌋; ask him.”) 
24 So they summoned the man who had been blind for the second time and said to him, “Give glory to God! We know that this man is a sinner!” 25 Then that man replied, “Whether he is a sinner I do not know. One thing I know—that although I﻿* was blind, now I see!” 26 So they said to him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” 27 He replied to them, “I told you already and you did not listen! Why do you want to hear it﻿* again? You do not want to become his disciples also, do you?”* 28 They reviled him and said, “You are his disciple! But we are disciples of Moses! 29 We know that God has spoken to Moses, but we do not know where this man is from.” 30 The man answered and said to them, “For the remarkable thing is this, that you do not know where he is from, and he opened my eyes! 31 We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if someone is devout and does his will, he listens to this one. 32 From ⌊time immemorial⌋ it has not been heard that someone opened the eyes of one born blind. 33 If this man were not from God, he would not be able to do anything!” 34 They answered and said to him, “You were born completely in sin, and are you attempting to teach﻿* us?” And they threw him out. 
Jesus as the Son of Man
35 Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding him, he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?” 36 He answered and said, “And who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?” 37 Jesus said to him, “You have both seen him, and he is the one who is speaking with you.” ⟦38 And he said, “I believe, Lord!” and he worshiped him. 39 And Jesus said,⟧ “For judgment I have come into this world, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind!” 40 Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things and said to him, “We are not also blind, are we?”* 41 Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would not have sin. But now you say, ‘We see,’ your sin remains. 
Jesus as the Good Shepherd
10 “Truly, truly I say to you, the one who does not enter through the door into the fold of the sheep, but climbs up at some other place—that one is a thief and a robber. 2 But the one who enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep. 3 For this one the doorkeeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. 4 Whenever he sends out all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him because they know his voice. 5 And they will never follow a stranger, but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.” 6 Jesus told them this parable, but they did not understand what it was that he was saying to them. 
7 Then Jesus said to them again, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep. 8 All those who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep do not listen to them. 9 I am the door. If anyone enters through me, he will be saved, and will come in and will go out and will find pasture. 10 The thief ⌊comes only⌋ so that he can steal and kill and destroy; I have come so that they may have life, and have it﻿* abundantly. 
11 “I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. 12 The hired hand, who is not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the wolf approaching and abandons the sheep and runs away—and the wolf seizes them and scatters them﻿*—13 because he is a hired hand and ⌊he is not concerned⌋ about the sheep. 
14 “I am the good shepherd, and I know my own, and my own know me, 15 just as the Father knows me and I know the Father, and I lay down my life for the sheep. 16 And I have other sheep which are not from this fold. I must bring these also, and they will hear my voice, and they will become one flock—one shepherd. 17 Because of this the Father loves me, because I lay down my life so that I may take possession of it again. 18 No one takes it from me, but I lay it down ⌊voluntarily⌋. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take possession of it again. This commandment I received from my Father.” 
19 Again there was a division among the Jews because of these words. 20 And many of them were saying, “He has a demon and is out of his mind! Why do you listen to him?” 21 Others were saying, “These are not the words of one who is possessed by a demon! A demon is not able to open the eyes of the blind, is it?”* 
Jesus at the Feast of the Dedication
22 Then the feast of the Dedication took place in Jerusalem. It was winter, 23 and Jesus was walking in the temple in the Portico of Solomon. 24 So the Jews surrounded him and began to say﻿* to him, “⌊How long will you keep us in suspense⌋? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly!” 25 Jesus answered them, “I told you and you do not believe! The deeds that I do in the name of my Father, these testify about me. 26 But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep! 27 My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. 28 And I give them eternal life, and they will never perish ⌊forever⌋, and no one will seize them out of my hand. 29 My Father, who has given them﻿* to me, is greater than all, and no one can seize them﻿* from the Father’s hand. 30 The Father and I are one.” 
31 Then the Jews picked up stones again so that they could stone him. 32 Jesus answered them, “I have shown you many good deeds from the Father. For which one of them are you going to stone me?” 33 The Jews answered him, “We are not going to stone you concerning a good deed, but concerning blasphemy, and because you, although you﻿* are a man, make yourself to be God!” 34 Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your law, ‘I said, “You are gods” ’? 35 If he called them ‘gods’ to whom the word of God came—and the scripture cannot be broken—36 do you say about he whom the Father set apart and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’? 37 If I do not do the deeds of my Father, do not believe me. 38 But if I am doing them,* even if you do not believe me, believe the deeds, so that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.” 39 So they were seeking again to seize him, and he departed out of their hand. 
40 And he went away again on the other side of the Jordan, to the place where John was baptizing at an earlier time, and he stayed there. 41 And many came to him and began to say,* “John performed no sign, but everything John said about this man was true!” 42 And many believed in him there. 
Lazarus Dies
11 Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha. 2 (Now it was Mary who anointed the Lord with perfumed oil and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.) 3 So the sisters sent word﻿* to him, saying, “Lord, behold, the one whom you love is sick.” 4 And when he﻿* heard it,* Jesus said, “This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God, in order that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” 5 (Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.) 6 So when he heard that he was sick, then he remained in the place ⌊where⌋ he was two days. 
7 Then after this he said to the disciples, “Let us go to Judea again.” 8 The disciples said to him, “Rabbi, the Jews were seeking just now to stone you, and are you going there again?” 9 Jesus replied, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks around in the daylight, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. 10 But if anyone walks around in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him. 11 He said these things, and after this he said to them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I am going so that I can awaken him.” 12 So the disciples said to him, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will get well.” 13 (Now Jesus had been speaking about his death, but they thought that he was speaking about ⌊real sleep⌋.) 14 So Jesus then said to them plainly, “Lazarus has died, 15 and I am glad ⌊for your sake⌋ that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.” 16 Then Thomas (the one who is called Didymus) said to his fellow disciples, “Let us go also, so that we may die with him.” 
Jesus the Resurrection and the Life
17 So when he﻿* arrived, Jesus found he had already been four days in the tomb. 18 (Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia. 19 So many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary in order to console them concerning their﻿* brother.) 20 Now Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, went to meet him, but Mary was sitting in the house. 21 So Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died. 22 Even now I know that whatever you ask God, God will grant you.” 23 Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise again.” 24 Martha said to him, “I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day.” 25 Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who believes in me, even if he dies, will live, 26 and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die ⌊forever⌋. Do you believe this?” 27 She said to him, “Yes, Lord, I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who comes into the world.” 
Jesus Weeps
28 And when she﻿* had said this, she went and called her sister Mary privately, saying, “The Teacher is here and is calling for you.” 29 So that one, when she heard it,* got up quickly and went to him. 30 (Now Jesus has not yet come into the village, but was still in the place where Martha went to meet him.) 31 So the Jews who were with her in the house and were consoling her, when they﻿* saw Mary—that she stood up quickly and went out—followed her, because they﻿* thought that she was going to the tomb in order to weep there. 
32 Then Mary, when she came where Jesus was and﻿* saw him, fell at his feet, saying to him, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” 33 Then Jesus, when he saw her weeping and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit and was troubled within himself. 34 And he said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to him, “Lord, come and see.” 35 Jesus wept. 36 So the Jews were saying, “See how he loved him!” 37 But some of them said, “Was not this man who opened the eyes of the blind able to do something﻿* so that this man also would not have died?” 
Lazarus Is Raised
38 Then Jesus, deeply moved within himself again, came to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone was lying on it. 39 Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the one who had died, said to him, “Lord, he is stinking already, because it has been four days.” 40 Jesus said to her, “Did I not say to you that if you believed, you would see the glory of God?” 41 So they took away the stone. And Jesus lifted up his﻿* eyes above and said, “Father, I give thanks to you that you hear me. 42 And I know that you always hear me, but for the sake of the crowd standing around I said it,* so that they may believe that you sent me.” 43 And when he﻿* had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!” 44 The one who had died came out, his﻿* feet and his﻿* hands bound with strips of cloth, and his face wrapped with a facecloth. Jesus said to them, “Untie him and let him go.” 
The Jewish Leaders Plot to Kill Jesus
45 Then many of the Jews who had come with Mary and saw the things which he did believed in him. 46 But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them the things which Jesus had done. 47 So the chief priests and the Pharisees called together the Sanhedrin and said, “What are we doing? For this man is performing many signs! 48 If we allow him to go on in this way, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.” 
49 But a certain one of them, Caiaphas (who was high priest in that year), said to them, “You do not know anything at all! 50 Nor do you consider that it is profitable for you that one man should die for the people, and the whole nation not perish.” 51 (Now he did not say this from himself, but being high priest in that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation, 52 and not for the nation only, but also that the children of God who are scattered would be gathered into one.) 53 So from that day they resolved that they should kill him. 54 So Jesus was no longer walking openly among the Jews, but went away from there to the region near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim, and there he stayed with the disciples. 
55 Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many went up to Jerusalem from the surrounding country before the Passover, so that they could purify themselves. 56 So they were looking for Jesus, and were speaking with one another while﻿* standing in the temple courts,* “What do you think? That he will not come to the feast?” 57 (Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone knew where he was, they should report it,* in order that they could arrest him.) 
Jesus Is Anointed at Bethany
12 Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. 2 So they made him a dinner there, and Martha was serving, but Lazarus was one of the ones reclining at table with him. 3 Then Mary took a pound of ointment of very valuable genuine nard and﻿* anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair. And the house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment. 4 But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples (the one who was going to betray him) said, 5 “⌊Why⌋ was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor?” 6 (Now he said this not because ⌊he was concerned⌋ about the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, he used to steal what was put into it.)* 7 So Jesus said, “Leave her alone, so that she may keep it for the day of my preparation for burial. 8 For you have the poor with you always, but you do not always have me.” 
The Decision to Kill Lazarus
9 Now a large crowd of Jews found out that he was there, and they came, not only because of Jesus, but so that they could see Lazarus also, whom he raised from the dead. 10 So the chief priests decided that they would kill Lazarus also, 11 because on account of him many of the Jews were going and believing in Jesus. 
The Triumphal Entry
12 On the next day the large crowd who had come to the feast, when they﻿* heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 13 took the branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, and began crying out, 
“Hosanna! 
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord, 
even the king of Israel!” 
14 So Jesus found a young donkey and﻿* sat on it, just as it is written, 
15 “Do not be afraid, daughter of Zion! 
Behold, your king is coming, 
seated on the foal of a donkey!” 
16 (His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things had been written about him and they did these things to him.) 17 So the crowd who was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead were continuing to testify. 18 Because of this also the crowd went to meet him, for they had heard that he had performed this sign. 19 So the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you are accomplishing nothing! Behold, the world has gone after him.” 
Greeks Seeking Jesus
20 Now some Greeks were among those who had gone up in order to worship at the feast. 21 So these approached Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and began asking him saying, “Sir, we want to see Jesus.” 22 Philip went and told Andrew. Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. 23 And Jesus answered them, saying, “The hour has come that the Son of Man will be glorified. 24 Truly, truly I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and﻿* dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit. 25 The one who loves his life loses it, and the one who hates his life in this world preserves it for eternal life. 26 If anyone serves me, he must follow me, and where I am, there my servant will be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him. 
Jesus Predicts His Death
27 “Now my soul is troubled, and what shall I say? ‘Father, deliver me from this hour’? But for this reason I have come to this hour! 28 Father, glorify your name!” Then a voice came from heaven, “I have both glorified it,* and I will glorify it﻿* again.” 29 Now the crowd that stood there and heard it﻿* said ⌊it had thundered⌋. Others were saying, “An angel has spoken to him!” 30 Jesus answered and said, “This voice has not happened for my sake, but for your sake. 31 Now is the judgment of this world! Now the ruler of this world will be thrown out! 32 And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.” 33 (Now he said this to indicate by what sort of death he was going to die.) 
34 Then the crowd replied to him, “We have heard from the law that the Christ remains ⌊forever⌋! And how do you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” 35 So Jesus said to them, “Yet a little time the light is with you! Walk while you have the light, so that the darkness does not overtake you! And the one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going. 36 While you have the light, believe in the light, in order that you may become sons of light.” Jesus said these things, and then he went away and﻿* was hidden from them. 
The People Still Refuse to Believe
37 But as many signs as he had performed before them, they did not believe in him, 38 in order that the word of the prophet Isaiah would be fulfilled, who said, 
“Lord, who has believed our message? 
And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” 
39 For this reason they were not able to believe, because again Isaiah said, 
40 “He has blinded their eyes 
and hardened their hearts, 
lest they see with their﻿* eyes 
and understand with their﻿* hearts 
and turn, and I heal them.” 
41 Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory, and he spoke about him. 
42 Yet despite that, even many of the rulers believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess it,* so that they would not be expelled from the synagogue. 43 For they loved the praise of men more than praise from God. 
Jesus’ Final Public Appeal
44 But Jesus cried out and said, “The one who believes in me does not believe in me, but in the one who sent me, 45 and the one who sees me sees the one who sent me. 46 I have come as a light into the world, in order that everyone who believes in me will not remain in the darkness. 47 And if anyone hears my words and does not observe them,* I will not judge him. For I have not come to judge the world, but to save the world. 48 The one who rejects me and does not accept my words has one who judges him; the word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day. 49 For I have not spoken from myself, but the Father himself who sent me ⌊has commanded me⌋ what I should say and what I should speak. 50 And I know that his commandment is eternal life. So the things that I say, just as the Father said to me, thus I say.” 
Jesus Washes His Disciples’ Feet
13 Now before the feast of Passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he would depart from this world to the Father, and﻿* having loved his﻿* own in the world, loved them to the end. 2 And as﻿* a dinner was taking place, when﻿* the devil had already put into the heart of Judas son of Simon Iscariot that he should betray him, 3 because he﻿* knew that the Father had given him all things into his﻿* hands, and that he had come forth from God and was going away to God, 4 he got up from the dinner and took off his﻿* outer clothing, and taking a towel, tied it﻿* around himself. 5 Then he poured water into the washbasin and began to wash the feet of the disciples, and to wipe them﻿* dry with the towel ⌊which he had tied around himself⌋. 
6 Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him, “Lord, are you going to wash my feet?” 7 Jesus answered and said to him, “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand after these things.” 8 Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet ⌊forever⌋!” Jesus replied to him, “Unless I wash you, you do not have a share with me.” 9 Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, not my feet only, but also my﻿* hands and my﻿* head!” 10 Jesus said to him, “The one who has bathed ⌊only needs⌋ to wash his﻿* feet, but is completely clean. And you are clean, but not all of you.” 11 (For he knew the one who would betray him; because of this he said, “Not all of you are clean.”) 
12 So when he had washed their feet and taken his outer clothing and reclined at table again, he said to them, “Do you understand what I have done for you? 13 You call me ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and you speak correctly, for I am. 14 If then I—your﻿* Lord and Teacher—wash your feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet. 15 For I have given you an example, that just as I have done for you, you also do. 16 Truly, truly I say to you, a slave is not greater than his master, nor a messenger greater than the one who sent him. 17 If you understand these things, you are blessed if you do them. 
18 “I am not speaking about all of you. I know whom I have chosen, but in order that the scripture would be fulfilled, ‘The one who eats my bread has lifted up his heel against me.’ 19 From now on I am telling you before it happens, in order that when it happens you may believe that I am he.* 20 Truly, truly I say to you, the one who receives anyone I send receives me, and the one who receives me receives the one who sent me.” 
Jesus Predicts Judas’ Betrayal
21 When he﻿* had said these things, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified and said, “Truly, truly I say to you that one of you will betray me.” 22 The disciples began looking﻿* at one another, uncertain about whom he was speaking. 23 One of his disciples—the one whom Jesus loved—was reclining ⌊close beside⌋ Jesus. 24 So Simon Peter gestured for this one to inquire who it was about whom he was speaking. 25 He leaned back accordingly against Jesus’ chest and﻿* said to him, “Lord, who is it?” 26 Jesus replied, “It is he to whom I dip the piece of bread and give it﻿* to him.” Then after﻿* dipping the piece of bread, he gave it﻿*﻿ to Judas son of Simon Iscariot. 27 And after the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him. Then Jesus said to him, “What you are doing, do quickly!” 28 (Now no one of those reclining at table knew for what reason he said this to him. 29 For some were thinking because Judas had the money box, Jesus was telling him, “Purchase ⌊what we need⌋ for the feast,” or that he should give something to the poor.) 30 So after he﻿* had taken the piece of bread, he went out immediately. And it was night. 
Jesus Predicts Peter’s Denial
31 Then, when he had gone out, Jesus said, “Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him. 32 If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and will glorify him immediately. 33 Children, yet a little time I am with you. You will seek me and just as I said to the Jews, “Where I am going you cannot come,” now I say also to you. 
34 “A new commandment I give to you: that you love one another—just as I have loved you, that you also love one another. 35 By this everyone will know that you are my disciples—if you have love for one another.” 
36 Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus replied, “Where I am going you cannot follow me now, but you will follow later.” 37 Peter said to him, “Lord, why am I not able to follow you now? I will lay down my life for you!” 38 Jesus replied, “Will you lay down your life for me? Truly, truly I say to you, the rooster will not crow until you have denied me three times! 
Jesus’ Farewell Discourse
14 “Do not let your hearts be troubled. You believe in God; believe also in me. 2 In my Father’s house there are many dwelling places; but if not, I would have told you, because I am going away to prepare a place for you. 3 And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you to myself, so that where I am, you may be also. 4 And you know the way where I am going.” 
5 Thomas said to him, “Lord, we do not know where you are going. How are we able to know the way?” 6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. 7 If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on you know him and have seen him.” 
8 Philip said to him, “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.” 9 Jesus said to him, “Am I with you so long a time and you have not known me, Philip? The one who has seen me has seen the Father! How can you say, ‘Show us the Father?’ 10 Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you I do not speak from myself, but the Father residing in me does his works. 11 Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; but if not, believe because of the works themselves. 12 Truly, truly I say to you, the one who believes in me, the works that I am doing he will do also, and he will do greater works﻿* than these because I am going to the Father. 13 And ⌊whatever⌋ you ask in my name, I will do this, in order that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 14 If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.* 
Jesus Promises the Holy Spirit
15 “If you love me, you will keep my commandments. 16 And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Advocate, in order that he may be with you ⌊forever⌋—17 the Spirit of truth, whom the world is not able to receive, because it does not see him or know him.* You know him, because he resides with you and will be in you. 
18 “I will not leave you as orphans; I am coming to you. 19 Yet a little time and the world will see me no longer, but you will see me; because I live, you also will live. 20 On that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you. 21 The one who has my commandments and keeps them—that one is the one who loves me. And the one who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will reveal myself to him.” 
22 Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, “Lord, why is it that you are going to reveal yourself to us and not to the world?” 23 Jesus answered and said to him, “If anyone loves me he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and ⌊will take up residence with him⌋. 24 The one who does not love me does not keep my words, and the word that you hear is not mine, but the Father’s who sent me. 25 These things I have spoken to you while﻿* residing with you. 26 But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name—that one will teach you all things, and will remind you of everything that I said to you. 
27 “Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you—not as the world gives, I give to you. Do not let your hearts be troubled, and do not let them﻿* be afraid. 28 You have heard that I said to you, ‘I am going away, and I am coming to you.’ If you loved me, you would have rejoiced that I am going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I am. 29 And now I have told you before it happens, so that when it happens, you may believe. 30 I will no longer speak much with you, for the ruler of the world is coming, and he has ⌊no power⌋ ⌊over⌋ me. 31 But so that the world may know that I love the Father, and just as the Father has commanded me, thus I am doing. Get up, let us go from here! 
The Vine and the Branches
15 “I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser. 2 Every branch that does not bear fruit in me, he removes it, and every branch that bears fruit, he prunes it in order that it may bear more fruit. 3 You are already clean because of the word that I have spoken to you. 4 Remain in me, and I in you. Just as the branch is not able to bear fruit from itself unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you, unless you remain in me. 
5 “I am the vine; you are the branches. The one who remains in me and I in him—this one bears much fruit, for apart from me you are not able to do anything. 6 If anyone does not remain in me, he is thrown out as a branch, and dries up, and they gather them and throw them﻿* into the fire, and they are burned. 7 If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you want and it will be done for you. 8 My Father is glorified by this: that you bear much fruit, and prove to be my disciples. 
9 “Just as the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Remain in my love. 10 If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commandments and remain in his love. 11 I have spoken these things to you in order that my joy may be in you, and your joy may be made complete. 12 This is my commandment: that you love one another just as I have loved you. 13 No one has greater love than this: that someone lay down his life for his friends. 14 You are my friends if you do what I command you. 15 No longer do I call you slaves, because the slave does not know what his master is doing. But I have called you friends, because everything that I have heard from my Father I have revealed to you. 16 You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit, and your fruit should remain, in order that whatever you ask the Father in my name he will give you. 17 These things I command you: that you love one another. 
The World’s Hatred for the Disciples
18 If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated﻿* you. 19 If you were of the world, the world would love its own. But because you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you. 20 Remember the word that I said to you: ‘A slave is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also. 21 But they will do all these things to you on account of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me. 22 If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin. But now they do not have a valid excuse for their sin. 23 The one who hates me hates my Father also. 24 If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would not have sin. But now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father. 25 But this happened﻿* so that the word that is written in their law would be fulfilled, ‘They hated me without a reason.’ 
26 “When the Advocate comes, whom I will send to you from the Father—the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father—that one will testify about me. 27 And you also will testify, because you have been with me from the beginning. 
Persecution of Disciples Predicted
16 “I have said these things to you so that you will not fall away. 2 ⌊They will expel you from the synagogue⌋, but an hour is coming that everyone who kills you will think they are offering service to God. 3 And they will do these things because they do not know the Father or me. 4 But I have said these things to you so that when their hour comes, you may remember that I told you about them. 
Jesus’ Departure and the Coming of the Holy Spirit
“And I have not said these things to you from the beginning, because I was with you. 5 But now I am going away to the one who sent me, and none of you is asking me, ‘Where are you going?’ 6 But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your hearts. 7 But I tell you the truth, it is better for you that I go away. For if I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you. 8 And when he﻿* comes, he will convict the world concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment: 9 concerning sin, because they do not believe in me, 10 and concerning righteousness, because I am going away to the Father and you will see me no more, 11 and concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been condemned. 
12 I still have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them﻿* now. 13 But when he—the Spirit of truth—comes, he will guide you into all the truth. For he will not speak from himself, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will proclaim to you the things to come. 14 He will glorify me, because he will take from what is mine and will proclaim it﻿* to you. 15 Everything that the Father has is mine. For this reason I said that he takes from what is mine and will proclaim it﻿* to you. 
Jesus Predicts His Return to the Disciples
16 “A little while and you will see me no more, and again a little while and you will see me. 17 So some of his disciples said to one another, “What is this that he is saying to us, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me,’ and ‘Because I am going away to the Father’?” 18 So they kept on saying, “What is this that he is saying, ‘A little while’? We do not understand what he is speaking about!” 
19 Jesus knew that they were wanting to ask him, and he said to them, “Are you deliberating with one another about this—that I said, ‘A little while, and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me’? 20 Truly, truly I say to you, that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice; you will become sorrowful, but your sorrow will change to joy. 21 A woman, when she gives birth, experiences pain because her hour has come. But when her﻿* child is born, she no longer remembers the affliction, on account of the joy that a human being has been born into the world. 22 So you also are experiencing sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy from you. 23 And on that day you will ask me nothing. Truly, truly I say to you, whatever you ask the Father in my name, he will give you. 24 Until now you have asked nothing in my name. Ask and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete. 
Jesus’ Victory Over the World
25 “I have said these things to you in figurative sayings. An hour is coming when I will speak to you in figurative sayings no longer, but I will tell you plainly about the Father. 26 On that day you will ask in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf. 27 For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God. 28 I have gone out from the Father and have come into the world; again, I am leaving the world and am going to the Father.” 
29 His disciples said, “Behold, now you are speaking ⌊plainly⌋ and are telling us﻿* no figurative saying! 30 Now we know that you know everything and do not ⌊need for⌋ anyone to ask you questions.* By this we believe that you have come from God.” 
31 Jesus replied to them, “Now do you believe? 32 Behold, an hour is coming—and has come—that you will be scattered each one to his own home, and you will leave me alone. And I am not alone, because the Father is with me. 33 I have said these things to you so that in me you may have peace. In the world you have affliction, but have courage! I have conquered the world.” 
Jesus Prays to be Glorified
17 Jesus said these things, and lifting up his eyes to heaven he said, “Father, the hour has come! Glorify your Son, in order that your Son may glorify you—2 just as you have given him authority over all flesh, in order that he would give eternal life to them—everyone whom you have given him. 3 Now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent. 4 I have glorified you on earth by﻿* completing the work that you have given me ⌊to do⌋. 5 And now, Father, you glorify me ⌊at your side⌋ with the glory that I had ⌊at your side⌋ before the world existed. 
Jesus Prays for His Disciples
6 “I have revealed your name to the men whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given them to me, and they have kept your word. 7 Now they understand that all the things that you have given me are from you, 8 because the words that you gave to me I have given to them, and they received them﻿* and know truly that I have come from you, and they have believed that you have sent me. 9 I am asking on behalf of them. I am not asking on behalf of the world, but on behalf of those whom you have given me, because they are yours, 10 and all my things are yours, and your things are mine, and I have been glorified in them. 11 And I am no longer in the world, and they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name, which you have given to me, so that they may be one, just as we are. 12 When I was with them, I kept them in your name, which you have given to me, and guarded them,* and none of them has perished except the son of destruction, in order that the scripture would be fulfilled. 13 And now I am coming to you, and I am saying these things in the world so that they may have my joy completed in themselves. 14 I have given them your word, and the world has hated them, because they are not of the world just as I am not of the world. 15 I do not ask that you take them out of the world, but that you protect them from the evil one. 16 They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world. 17 Sanctify them in the truth—your word is truth. 18 Just as you sent me into the world, I also have sent them into the world. 19 And for them I sanctify myself, so that they themselves also may be sanctified in the truth. 
Jesus Prays for the Unity of Believers
20 “And I do not ask on behalf of these only, but also on behalf of those who believe in me through their word, 21 that they all may be one, just as you, Father, are in me and I am in you, that they also may be in us, in order that the world may believe that you sent me. 22 And the glory that you have given to me, I have given to them, in order that they may be one, just as we are one—23 I in them, and you in me, in order that they may be completed in one, so that the world may know that you sent me, and you have loved them just as you have loved me. 
24 “Father, those whom you have given to me—I want that those also may be with me where I am, in order that they may see my glory that you have given me because you loved me before the foundation of the world. 25 Righteous Father, although the world does not know you, yet I have known you, and these men have come to know that you sent me. 26 And I made known to them your name, and will make it﻿* known, in order that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I may be in them.” 
Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
18 When﻿* Jesus had said these things, he went out with his disciples to the other side of the ravine of the Kidron, where there was a garden into which he and his disciples entered. 2 (Now Judas, the one who betrayed him, also knew about the place, because Jesus often gathered there with his disciples.) 3 So Judas, taking the cohort and officers from the chief priests and from the Pharisees, came there with lanterns and torches and weapons. 4 Then Jesus, because he﻿* knew all the things that were coming upon him, went out and said to them, “Who are you looking for?” 5 They replied to him, “Jesus the Nazarene.” He said to them, “I am he.”* (Now Judas, the one who betrayed him, was also standing with them.) 6 So when he said to them, “I am he,”* ⌊they drew back⌋ and fell to the ground. 7 Then he asked them again, “Who are you looking for?” And they said, “Jesus the Nazarene.” 8 Jesus replied, “I said to you that I am he!* So if you are looking for me, let these men go,” 9 in order that the word that he had spoken would be fulfilled: “Those whom you have given to me—I have not lost anyone of them.” 
10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the slave of the high priest and cut off his right ear. (Now the name of the slave was Malchus.) 11 So Jesus said to Peter, “Put the sword into its﻿* sheath! The cup that the Father has given me—shall I not drink it?” 
Jesus Taken to Annas
12 Then the cohort and the military tribune and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and tied him up, 13 and brought him﻿* to Annas first, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. 14 (Now it was Caiaphas who had advised the Jews that it was better that one man die for the people.) 
Peter Denies Jesus the First Time
15 So Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. (Now that disciple was known to the high priest, and entered with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest.) 16 But Peter was standing by the door outside. So the other disciple who was known to the high priest went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought Peter in. 17 Then the female slave who was the doorkeeper said to Peter, “You are not also one of the disciples of this man, are you?”* He said, “I am not!” 18 (Now the slaves and the officers were standing there, having made a charcoal fire because it was cold, and they were warming themselves. And Peter was also standing there with them and warming himself.) 
Jesus Before Annas
19 So the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching. 20 Jesus replied to him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I always taught in the synagogue and in the temple courts﻿* where all the Jews assemble, and I have said nothing in secret. 21 Why are you asking me? Ask those who heard what I have said to them! Behold, these people know what I said.” 22 Now when﻿* he had said these things, one of the officers who was standing by gave a slap in the face to Jesus, saying, “Do you reply to the high priest in this way?” 23 Jesus replied to him, “If I have spoken wrongly, testify about what is wrong! But if I have spoken﻿* correctly, why do you strike me?” 24 Then Annas sent him, tied up, to Caiaphas the high priest. 
Peter Denies Jesus the Second and Third Times
25 Now Simon Peter was standing there and warming himself. So they said to him, “You are not also one of his disciples, are you?”* He denied it﻿* and said, “I am not!” 26 One of the slaves of the high priest, who was related to the one whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Did I not see you in the garden with him?” 27 So Peter denied it﻿* again, and immediately a rooster crowed. 
Jesus Brought Before Pilate
28 Then they brought Jesus from Caiaphas to the governor’s residence. Now it was early, and they did not enter into the governor’s residence so that they would not be defiled, but could eat the Passover. 29 So Pilate came outside to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?” 30 They answered and said to him, “If this man were not doing evil, we would not have handed him over to you!” 31 So Pilate said to them, “You take him and judge him according to your law!” The Jews said to him, “It is not permitted for us to kill anyone,” 32 in order that the word of Jesus would be fulfilled that he had spoken, indicating by what sort of death he was going to die. 
Pilate Questions Jesus
33 Then Pilate entered again into the governor’s residence and summoned Jesus and said to him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” 34 Jesus replied, “Do you say this from yourself, or have others said this﻿* to you about me?” 35 Pilate replied, “I am not a Jew, am I?* Your people and the chief priests handed you over to me! What have you done?” 36 Jesus replied, “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would be fighting so that I would not be handed over to the Jews. But now my kingdom is not from here.” 37 Then Pilate said to him, “So then you are a king!” Jesus replied, “You say that I am a king. For this reason I was born, and for this reason I have come into the world: in order that I can testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth hears my voice.” 38 Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” 
And when he﻿* had said this, he went out again to the Jews and said to them, “I find no basis for an accusation against him. 39 But it is your custom that I release for you one prisoner﻿* at the Passover. So do you want me﻿* to release for you the king of the Jews?” 40 Then they shouted again, saying, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” (Now Barabbas was a revolutionary.) 
Pilate Attempts to Release Jesus
19 So then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged.* 2 And the soldiers wove a crown of thorns and placed it﻿* on his head, and put a purple robe on him, 3 and were coming up to him and saying, “Hail, king of the Jews!” and were giving him slaps in the face. 
4 And Pilate came outside again and said to them, “Behold, I am bringing him outside to you, so that you will know that I find no basis for an accusation against him.” 5 Then Jesus came outside wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe, and he said to them, “Behold the man!” 6 So when they saw him, the chief priests and the officers shouted, saying, “Crucify! Crucify!” Pilate said to them, “You take him and crucify him!* For I do not find a basis for an accusation against him.” 7 The Jews replied to him, “We have a law, and according to the law he ought to die, because he made himself out to be the Son of God!” 
8 So when Pilate heard this statement, he was even more afraid, 9 and he entered into the governor’s residence again and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” But Jesus did not give him an answer. 10 So Pilate said to him, “Will you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you, and I have authority to crucify you?” 11 Jesus replied to him, “You would not have any authority over me unless it was given to you from above. For this reason the one who handed me over to you has greater sin.” 
12 From this point on Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews shouted, saying, “If you release this man, you are not a friend of Caesar! Everyone who makes himself out to be a king opposes Caesar!” 13 So Pilate, when he﻿* heard these words, brought Jesus outside and sat down on the judgment seat, in the place called The Stone Pavement (but Gabbatha in Aramaic). 14 (Now it was the day of preparation of the Passover; it was about the sixth hour.) And he said to the Jews, “Behold your king!” 
15 Then those shouted, “Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” The chief priests replied, “We do not have a king except Caesar!” 16 So then he handed him over to them in order that he could be crucified. 
Jesus Is Crucified
So they took Jesus, 17 and carrying for himself the cross, he went out to the place called The Place of a Skull (which is called Golgotha in Aramaic), 18 where they crucified him, and with him two others, ⌊one on each side⌋, and Jesus in the middle. 19 And Pilate also wrote a notice and placed it﻿* on the cross, and it was written: “Jesus the Nazarene, the king of the Jews.” 20 So many of the Jews read this notice, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city. And it was written in Aramaic, in Latin, and in Greek. 21 Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write ‘The king of the Jews,’ but, ‘He said, I am king of the Jews.’ ” 22 Pilate replied, “What I have written, I have written.” 
23 Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his clothing and made four shares—for each soldier a share—and the tunic. (Now the tunic was seamless, woven from the top ⌊in a single piece⌋.) 24 So they said to one another, “Let us not tear it apart, but cast lots for it, to see whose it will be,” so that the scripture would be fulfilled that says, 
“They divided my garments among themselves, 
and for my clothing they cast lots.” 
Thus the soldiers did these things. 
25 Now his mother and the sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene were standing near the cross of Jesus. 26 So Jesus, seeing his﻿* mother and the disciple whom he loved standing there, said to his﻿* mother, “Woman, behold your son!” 27 Then he said to the disciple, “Behold your mother!” And from that hour the disciple took her into his own home. 
Jesus Dies on the Cross
28 After this, Jesus, knowing that now at last everything was completed, in order that the scripture would be fulfilled, said, “I am thirsty.” 29 A jar full of sour wine was standing there, so they put a sponge full of the sour wine on a branch of hyssop and﻿* brought it﻿* to his mouth. 30 Then when he had received the sour wine, Jesus said, “It is completed,” and bowing his﻿* head, he gave up his﻿* spirit. 
31 Then the Jews, because it was the day of preparation, so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was an important day), asked Pilate that their legs could be broken and they could be taken away. 32 So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who had been crucified with him. 33 But when they﻿* came to Jesus, after they saw he was already dead, they did not break his legs. 34 But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and blood and water came out immediately. 35 And the one who has seen it﻿* has testified, and his testimony is true, and that person knows that he is telling the truth, so that you also may believe. 36 For these things happened in order that the scripture would be fulfilled: “Not a bone of his will be broken.” 37 And again another scripture says, “They will look on the one whom they have pierced.” 
Jesus Is Buried
38 And after these things, Joseph who was from Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus (but a secret one for fear of the Jews), asked Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus. And Pilate allowed it,* so he came and took away his body. 39 And Nicodemus—the one who had come to him formerly at night—also came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes weighing about a hundred pounds. 40 So they took the body of Jesus and wrapped it in strips of linen cloth with the fragrant spices, as is the Jews’ custom to prepare for burial. 41 Now there was a garden at the place where he was crucified, and in the garden a new tomb in which no one was yet buried. 42 So there, on account of the day of preparation of the Jews, because the tomb was close by, they buried Jesus. 
Jesus Is Raised
20 Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early, while it﻿* was still dark, and saw the stone had been taken away from the tomb. 2 So she ran and came to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved and said to them, “They have taken away the Lord from the tomb and we do not know where they have put him!” 3 Then Peter and the other disciple went out and were going to the tomb. 4 And the two were running together, and the other disciple ran ahead, faster than Peter, and came to the tomb first. 5 And bending over to look, he saw the strips of linen cloth lying there, though he did not go in. 6 Then Simon Peter also came following him, and he went into the tomb and saw the strips of linen cloth lying there, 7 and the facecloth that was on his head—not lying with the strips of linen cloth, but folded up separately in one place. 8 So then the other disciple who had come to the tomb first also went in, and he saw and believed. 9 (For they did not yet know the scripture that it was necessary for him to rise from the dead.) 
Jesus Appears to Mary Magdalene
10 Then the disciples went away again to their own homes.* 11 But Mary stood outside at the tomb, weeping. Then, while she was weeping, she bent over to look into the tomb, 12 and she saw two angels in white, seated one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been lying. 13 And they said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have put him!” 14 When she﻿* had said these things, she turned ⌊around⌋ and saw Jesus standing there, and she did not know that it was Jesus. 
15 Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?” She thought that it was the gardener, and﻿* said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will take him.” 16 Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned around and﻿* said to him in Aramaic, “Rabboni” (which means “Teacher”). 17 Jesus said to her, “Do not touch me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father, and my God and your God.’ ” 18 Mary Magdalene came and﻿* announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord,” and he had said these things to her. 
Jesus Appears to the Disciples
19 Now when it﻿* was evening on that day—the first day of the week—and the doors had been shut where the disciples were because of fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, “Peace to you.” 20 And when he﻿* had said this, he showed his﻿* hands and his﻿* side to them. Then the disciples rejoiced when they﻿* saw the Lord. 21 So Jesus said to them again, “Peace to you. As the Father has sent me, I also send you.” 22 And when he﻿* had said this, he breathed on them﻿* and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit. 23 If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them. If you retain the sins﻿* of any, they are retained.” 
Thomas Doubts But Later Believes
24 Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who was called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. 25 So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord!” But he said to them, “Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and put my finger into the mark of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will never believe!” 
26 And after eight days his disciples were again inside, and Thomas with them. Although﻿* the doors had been shut, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said, “Peace to you.” 27 Then he said to Thomas, “Place your finger here and see my hands, and place your hand and put it﻿* into my side. And do not be unbelieving, but believing!” 28 Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!” 29 Jesus said to him, “Because you have seen me, have you believed? Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.” 
Why This Book Was Written
30 Now Jesus also performed many other signs in the presence of the disciples which are not recorded in this book, 31 but these things are recorded in order that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by﻿* believing you may have life in his name. 
Jesus Appears to the Disciples in Galilee
21 After these things Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias. Now he revealed himself﻿* in this way: 2 Simon Peter and Thomas (who was called Didymus) and Nathanael from Cana in Galilee and the sons of Zebedee and two others of his disciples were together. 3 Simon Peter said to them, “I am going fishing!” They said to him, “We also are coming with you.” They went out and got into the boat, and during that night they caught nothing. 
4 Now when it﻿* was already early morning, Jesus stood on the beach. However, the disciples did not know that it was Jesus. 5 So Jesus said to them, “Children, you do not have any fish to eat, do you?* They answered him, “No.” 6 And he said to them, “Throw the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.”* So they threw it,* and were no longer able to haul it in from the large number of the fish. 
7 Then that disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” So Simon Peter, when he﻿* heard that it was the Lord, tied around himself his outer garment (for he was naked) and threw himself into the sea. 8 But the other disciples came in the boat, dragging the net of fish, because they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits away. 
9 So when they got out on the land, they saw a charcoal fire laid there, and a fish lying on it,* and bread. 10 Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish that you have just now caught.” 11 So Simon Peter got into the boat﻿* and hauled the net to the land, full of large fish—one hundred fifty-three—and although there﻿* were so many, the net was not torn. 12 Jesus said to them, “Come, eat breakfast!” But none of the disciples dared to ask him, “Who are you?” because they﻿* knew that it was the Lord. 13 Jesus came and took the bread and gave it﻿* to them, and the fish likewise. 14 This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to the disciples after he﻿* had been raised from the dead. 
Peter Is Restored Three Times
15 Now when they had eaten breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed my lambs!” 16 He said to him again a second time, “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Shepherd my sheep!” 17 He said to him a third time, “Simon son of John, do you love me?” Peter was distressed because he said to him a third time, “Do you love me?” and he said to him, “Lord, you know everything! You know that I love you!” Jesus said to him, “Feed my sheep! 18 Truly, truly I say to you, when you were young, you tied your clothes﻿* around yourself and walked wherever you wanted. But when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will tie you up and carry you where you do not want to go.* 19 (Now he said this to indicate by what kind of death he would glorify God.) And after he﻿* had said this, he said to him, “Follow me!” 
Peter and the Other Disciple Jesus Loved
20 Peter turned and﻿* saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them﻿* (who also leaned back on his chest at the dinner and said, “Lord, who is the one betraying you?”) 21 So when he﻿* saw this one, Peter said to Jesus, “Lord, but what about this one?” 22 Jesus said to him, “If I want him to remain until I come, what is that﻿* to you? You follow me!” 23 So this saying went out to the brothers that that disciple would not die. But Jesus did not say to him that he would not die, but “If I want him to remain until I come, what is that﻿* to you?” 
A Concluding Word of Testimony
24 This is the disciple who is testifying about these things, and who has written down these things. And we know that his testimony is true. 25 Now there are also many other things that Jesus did, which—if they were written down one after the other—I suppose not even the world itself could contain the books that would be written.

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES

The Preface
1 I produced the former account, O Theophilus, about all ⌊that⌋ Jesus began to do and to teach, 2 until the day he was taken up, after he﻿* had given orders through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen, 3 to whom he also presented himself alive after he suffered, with many convincing proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty days and speaking the things about the kingdom of God. 4 And while he﻿* was with them,* he commanded them, “Do not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for what was promised by the Father, which you heard about from me. 5 For John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit ⌊not many days from now⌋.” 
The Ascension
6 So when﻿* they had come together, they began asking﻿* him, saying, “Lord, is it at this time you are restoring the kingdom to Israel?” 7 But he said to them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has set by his own authority. 8 But you will receive power when﻿* the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the farthest part of the earth.” 9 And after he﻿* had said these things, while﻿* they were watching, he was taken up, and a cloud received him from their sight. 10 And as they were staring into the sky while﻿* he was departing, behold, two men in white clothing stood by them 11 who also said, “Men ⌊of Galilee⌋, why do you stand there looking into the sky? This Jesus who was taken up from you into heaven like this will come back in the same way you saw him departing into heaven!” 
Matthias Chosen to Replace Judas
12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain that is called Olive Grove which is near Jerusalem, ⌊a Sabbath day’s journey away⌋. 13 And when they had entered, they went up to the upstairs room where they were staying—Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot and Judas son of James. 14 All these were busily engaged with one mind in prayer, together with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brothers. 
15 And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brothers (and it was a crowd of persons of about one hundred twenty at the same place) and﻿* said, 16 “Men and brothers, it was necessary that the scripture be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit proclaimed beforehand through the mouth of David concerning Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus, 17 because he was counted among us and received a share in this ministry.” 18 (Now this man acquired a field for the wages of his wickedness, and falling headlong, he burst open in the middle and all his intestines spilled out. 19 And it became known to all who live in Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their own language “Akeldama,” that is, “Field of Blood.”) 20 “For it is written in the book of Psalms, 
‘Let his residence become deserted, 
and let there be no one to live in it,’ 
and, 
‘Let another person take his position.’ 
21 Therefore it is necessary for one of the men who have accompanied us during all the time in which the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us, 22 beginning from the baptism of John until the day on which he was taken up from us—one of these men must become a witness of his resurrection together with us.” 23 And they proposed two men, Joseph called Barsabbas (who was called Justus) and Matthias. 24 And they prayed and﻿* said, “You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show clearly which one of these two you have chosen 25 to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas turned aside to depart to his own place.” 26 And they cast lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was added to serve﻿* with the eleven apostles. 
Pentecost and the Coming of the Holy Spirit
2 And when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all together in the same place. 2 And suddenly a sound like a violent rushing wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting. 3 And divided tongues like fire appeared to them and rested on each one of them. 4 And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other languages as the Spirit gave them ability to speak out. 
5 Now there were Jews residing in Jerusalem, devout men from every nation under heaven. 6 And when﻿* this sound occurred, the crowd gathered and was in confusion, because each one was hearing them speaking in his own language. 7 And they were astounded and astonished, saying, “Behold, are not all these who are speaking Galileans? 8 And how do we hear, each one of us, in ⌊our own native language⌋? 9 Parthians and Medes and Elamites and those residing in Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, 10 Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya toward Cyrene, and the Romans who were in town, 11 both Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabs—we hear them speaking in our own languages the great deeds of God!” 12 And all were amazed and greatly perplexed, saying ⌊to one another⌋, “⌊What can this mean?⌋” 13 But others jeered and﻿* said, “They are full of sweet new wine!” 
Peter’s Sermon on the Day of Pentecost
14 But Peter, standing with the eleven, raised his voice and declared to them, “Judean men, and all those who live in Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and pay attention to my words! 15 For these men are not drunk, as you assume, because it is the third hour of the day. 16 But this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel: 
17 ‘And it will be in the last days,’ God says, 
‘I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh, 
and your sons and your daughters will prophesy, 
and your young men will see visions, 
and your old men will dream dreams. 
18 And even on my male slaves and on my female slaves 
I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy. 
19 And I will cause wonders in the heaven above 
and signs on the earth below, 
blood and fire and vapor of smoke. 
20 The sun will be changed to darkness 
and the moon to blood, 
before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes. 
21 And it will be that everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord will be saved.’ 
22 “Israelite men, listen to these words! Jesus the Nazarene, a man attested to you by God with deeds of power and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, just as you yourselves know—23 this man, delivered up by the determined plan and foreknowledge of God, you executed by﻿* nailing to a cross﻿* through the hand of lawless men. 24 God raised ⌊him⌋ up, having brought to an end the pains of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it. 25 For David says with reference to him, 
‘I saw the Lord before me ⌊continually⌋, 
for he is at my right hand so that I will not be shaken. 
26 For this reason my heart was glad 
and my tongue rejoiced greatly, 
furthermore also my flesh will live in hope, 
27 because you will not abandon my soul in Hades, 
nor will you permit your Holy One to experience decay. 
28 You have made known to me the paths of life; 
you will fill me with gladness with your presence.’ 
29 “Men and brothers, it is possible to speak with confidence to you about the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us until this day. 30 Therefore, because he﻿* was a prophet and knew that God had sworn to him with an oath to seat ⌊one of his descendants⌋ on his throne, 31 by﻿* having foreseen this,* he spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was he abandoned in Hades nor did his flesh experience decay. 32 This Jesus God raised up, of which we all are witnesses. 33 Therefore, having been exalted to the right hand of God and having received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he has poured out this that you see and hear. 34 For David did not ascend into heaven, but he himself says, 
‘The Lord said to my Lord, 
“Sit at my right hand, 
35 until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.” ’ 
36 Therefore let all the house of Israel know beyond a doubt, that God has made him both Lord and Christ—this Jesus whom you crucified!” 
The Response to Peter’s Sermon
37 Now when they﻿* heard this,* they were pierced to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, “What should we do, men and brothers?” 38 And Peter said to them, “Repent and be baptized, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 39 For the promise is for you and for your children, and for all those who are far away, as many as the Lord our God calls to himself.” 40 And with many other words he solemnly urged and exhorted them, saying, “Be saved from this crooked generation!” 41 So those who accepted his message were baptized, and on that day about three thousand souls were added. 
The Fellowship of the First Believers
42 And they were devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayers. 43 And fear came on every soul, and many wonders and signs were being performed by the apostles. 44 And all who believed were in the same place, and had everything in common. 45 And they began selling﻿* their﻿* possessions and property, and distributing these things to all, to the degree that anyone had need. 46 And every day, devoting themselves to meeting﻿* with one purpose in the temple courts﻿* and breaking bread from house to house, they were eating their food with joy and simplicity of heart, 47 praising God and having favor with all the people. And the Lord was adding every day to the total of those who were being saved. 
A Lame Beggar Healed at the Temple
3 Now Peter and John were going up to the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour. 2 And a certain man was being carried who was lame ⌊from birth⌋. ⌊He⌋ was placed every day at the gate of the temple called “Beautiful,” so that he could ask for charitable gifts from those who were going into the temple courts.* 3 When he﻿* saw Peter and John about to go into the temple courts,* he began asking to receive alms. 4 And Peter looked intently at him, together with John, and﻿* said, “Look at us!” 5 So he fixed his attention on them, expecting to receive something from them. 6 But Peter said, “Silver and gold ⌊I do not possess⌋, but what I have, this I give to you—in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, walk!” 7 And taking hold of him by the right hand, he raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankles were made strong. 8 And leaping up, he stood and began walking around﻿* and entered into the temple courts﻿* with them, walking and leaping and praising God. 9 And all the people saw him walking and praising God, 10 And they recognized him, that this one was the one who used to sit asking for alms at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were filled with awe and astonishment at what had happened to him. 
Peter’s Sermon in Solomon’s Portico
11 And while﻿* he was holding fast to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the portico called Solomon’s, utterly astonished. 12 And when he﻿* saw it,* Peter replied to the people, “Men and Israelites, why are you astonished at this? Or why are you staring at us, as if by our own power or godliness we have made him walk? 13 The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you handed over and denied in the presence of Pilate, after he had decided to release him.* 14 But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and demanded that a man—a murderer—be granted to you. 15 And you killed the originator of life, whom God raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses! 16 And on the basis of faith in his name, his name has made this man strong, whom you see and know, and the faith that is through him has given him this perfect health in the presence of you all. 17 And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, just as your rulers did also. 18 But the things which God foretold through the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ would suffer, he has fulfilled in this way. 19 Therefore repent and turn back, so that your sins may be blotted out, 20 so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and he may send the Christ appointed for you—Jesus, 21 whom heaven must receive until the times of the restoration of all things, about which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets from earliest times. 22 Moses said, ‘The Lord God will raise up for you a prophet like me from your brothers. You will listen to him in everything that he says to you. 23 And it will be that every soul who does not listen to that prophet will be destroyed utterly from the people.’ 24 And indeed, all the prophets from Samuel and all those who followed him﻿* have spoken about and proclaimed these days. 25 You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God ordained with your fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your offspring all the nations of the earth will be blessed.’ 26 God, after he﻿* had raised up his servant, sent him to you first, to bless you by turning each of you back from your wickedness!” 
Peter and John Arrested
4 And while﻿* they were speaking to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees approached them, 2 greatly annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection from the dead. 3 And they laid hands on them and put them﻿* in custody until the next day, because it was already evening. 4 But many of those who listened to the message believed, and the number of the men was approximately five thousand. 
Peter and John on Trial Before the Sanhedrin
5 And it happened that on the next day, their rulers and elders and scribes came together in Jerusalem, 6 and Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas and John and Alexander, and all those who were from the high priest’s family. 7 And they made them stand in their﻿* midst and﻿* began to ask,* “By what power or by what name did you do this?” 8 Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, “Rulers of the people and elders, 9 if we are being examined today concerning a good deed done to a sick man—by what means this man was healed—10 let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel that by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead—by him this man stands before you healthy! 11 This one is the stone that was rejected by you, the builders, that has become ⌊the cornerstone⌋. 12 And there is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven that is given among people by which we must be saved.” 
13 Now when they﻿* saw the boldness of Peter and John, and understood that they were uneducated and untrained men, they were astonished, and recognized them, that they had been with Jesus. 14 And because they﻿* saw the man who had been healed standing there with them, they had nothing to say in return. 15 But after they﻿* had ordered them to go outside the Sanhedrin, they began to confer﻿* with one another, 16 saying, “What should we do with these men? For that a remarkable sign has taken place through them is evident to all those who live in Jerusalem, and we are not able to deny it!* 17 But in order that it may not spread much further among the people, let us warn them to speak no more in this name ⌊to anyone at all⌋.” 18 And they called them back and﻿* commanded them﻿* not to speak or to teach at all in the name of Jesus. 19 But Peter and John answered and﻿* said to them, “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than God, you decide! 20 For we are not able to refrain from speaking about the things that we have seen and heard.” 21 So after﻿* threatening them﻿* further, they released them, finding no way to punish them on account of the people, because they were all praising God for what had happened. 22 For the man on whom this sign of healing had been performed was more than forty years old. 
The Believers Pray for Continued Bold Witness
23 And when they﻿* were released, they went to their own people and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them. 24 And when they﻿* heard it,* they lifted their voices with one mind to God and said, “Master, you are the one who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them, 25 the one who said by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of our father David, your servant, 
‘Why do the nations rage, 
and the peoples conspire in vain? 
26 The kings of the earth stood opposed, 
and the rulers assembled together at the same place, 
against the Lord and against his Christ.’ 
27 For in truth both Herod and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, assembled together in this city against your holy servant Jesus whom you anointed, 28 to do all that your hand and plan had predestined to take place. 29 And now, Lord, concern yourself with their threats and grant your slaves to speak your message with all boldness, 30 as you extend your hand to heal and signs and wonders are performed through the name of your holy servant Jesus.” 31 And when﻿* they had prayed, the place in which they were gathered was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak﻿* the word of God with boldness. 
The Believers Share All Things in Common
32 Now the group of those who believed were one heart and soul, and no one said anything of what belonged to him was his own, but all things were theirs in common. 33 And with great power the apostles were giving testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was on them all. 34 For there was not even anyone needy among them, because all those who were owners of plots of land or houses were selling them﻿* and﻿* bringing the proceeds of the things that were sold 35 and placing them﻿* at the feet of the apostles. And it was being distributed to each as anyone had need. 36 So Joseph, who was called Barnabas by the apostles (which is translated “son of encouragement”), a Levite of Cyprus by nationality, 37 sold a field that belonged to him and﻿* brought the money and placed it﻿* at the feet of the apostles. 
Ananias and Sapphira Lie to the Holy Spirit
5 Now a certain man ⌊named⌋ Ananias, together with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property, 2 and he kept back for himself some of the proceeds, and his﻿* wife was aware of it.* And he brought a certain part and﻿* placed it﻿* at the feet of the apostles. 3 But Peter said, “Ananias, for what reason has Satan filled your heart, that you lied to the Holy Spirit and kept back for yourself some of the proceeds of the piece of land? 4 When it﻿* remained to you, did it not remain yours? And when it﻿* was sold, was it at your disposal? How is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to people, but to God!” 
5 And when﻿* Ananias heard these words, he fell down and﻿* died. And great fear came on all those who heard about it.* 6 So the young men stood up, wrapped him up, and carried him﻿* out and﻿* buried him.* 7 And it happened that there was an interval of about three hours, and his wife came in, not knowing what had happened. 8 And Peter said to her, “Tell me whether you both﻿* were paid this much for the piece of land.” And she said, “Yes, this much.” 9 So Peter said to her, “How is it that it was agreed by you two﻿* to test the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out!” 10 And immediately she fell down at his feet and died. So when﻿* the young men came in, they found her dead, and carried her﻿* out and﻿* buried her﻿* with her husband. 11 And great fear came on the whole church and on all who heard about these things. 
Many Signs and Wonders Are Performed by the Apostles
12 Now many signs and wonders were being performed among the people through the hands of the apostles. And they were all together in Solomon’s Portico. 13 And none of the rest dared to join them, but the people spoke highly of them. 14 And even more believers in the Lord were being added, large numbers of both men and women, 15 so that they even carried out the sick into the streets and put them﻿* on cots and mats so that when﻿* Peter came by, at least his﻿* shadow would fall on some of them. 16 And the people of the towns around Jerusalem also came together, bringing the sick and those tormented by unclean spirits, who were all being healed. 
The Apostles Arrested and Imprisoned
17 Now the high priest rose up and all those who were with him (that is, the party of the Sadducees), and﻿* they were filled with jealousy. 18 And they laid hands on the apostles and put them in the public prison. 19 But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the prison and led them out and﻿* said, 20 “Go and stand in the temple courts﻿* and﻿* proclaim to the people all the words of this life.” 21 And when they﻿* heard this,* they entered at daybreak into the temple courts﻿* and began teaching.* 
Now when﻿* the high priest and those with him arrived, they summoned the Sanhedrin—even the whole council of elders of the sons of Israel—and sent to the prison to have them brought. 22 But the officers who came did not find them in the prison, and they returned and﻿* reported, 23 saying, “We found the prison locked with all security and the guards standing at the doors, but when we﻿* opened them,* we found no one inside!” 24 Now when both the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were greatly perplexed concerning them, as to what this might be. 25 But someone came and﻿* reported to them, “Behold, the men whom you put in prison are standing in the temple courts﻿* and teaching the people!” 26 Then the captain went with the officers and﻿* brought them, not with force (for they were afraid of the people, lest they be stoned by them).* 
The Apostles on Trial Before the Sanhedrin
27 And when they﻿* had brought them, they made them﻿* stand in the Sanhedrin, and the high priest put a question to them, 28 saying, “⌊We strictly commanded⌋ you not to teach in this name? And behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching! And you are intending to bring upon us the blood of this man!” 29 But Peter and the apostles answered and﻿* said, “It is necessary to obey God rather than men! 30 The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed by﻿* hanging him﻿* on a tree. 31 This one God has exalted to his right hand as Leader and Savior to grant repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. 32 And we are witnesses of these things, and so is﻿* the Holy Spirit whom God has given to those who obey him.” 33 Now when﻿* they heard this,* they were infuriated, and were wanting to execute them. 34 But a certain man stood up in the Sanhedrin, a Pharisee ⌊named⌋ Gamaliel, a teacher of the law respected by all the people, and﻿* gave orders to put the men outside for a short time. 35 And he said to them, “Men and Israelites, take care for yourselves what you are about to do to these men! 36 For before these days, Theudas rose up saying he was somebody. A number of men, about four hundred, joined ⌊him⌋. ⌊He⌋ was executed, and all who followed him were dispersed and came to nothing. 37 After this man, Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the census and ⌊caused people to follow him in revolt⌋. And that one perished, and all who followed him were scattered. 38 And now I tell you, keep away from these men, and leave them alone, because if this plan or this matter is from people, it will be overthrown. 39 But if it is from God, you will not be able to overthrow them, lest you even be found fighting against God.” So they were persuaded by him. 40 And they summoned the apostles, beat them,* commanded them﻿* not to speak in the name of Jesus, and released them.* 41 So they went out from the presence of the Sanhedrin rejoicing, because they had been considered worthy to be dishonored for the sake of the name. 42 Every day, both in the temple courts﻿* and from house to house, they did not stop teaching and proclaiming the good news that the Christ was Jesus. 
The First Seven Deacons Appointed
6 Now in these days, as﻿* the disciples were increasing in number,* a complaint arose by the ⌊Greek-speaking Jews⌋ against the ⌊Hebraic Jews⌋ because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.* 2 So the twelve summoned the community of disciples and﻿* said, “It is not desirable that we neglect the word of God to serve tables. 3 So, brothers, select from among you seven men ⌊of good reputation⌋, full of the Spirit and wisdom, whom we will put in charge of this need. 4 But we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.” 5 And the statement pleased the whole group, and they chose Stephen (a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit), and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus (a convert from Antioch), 6 whom they stood before the apostles. And they prayed and﻿* placed their﻿* hands on them. 
7 And the word of God kept spreading, and the number of disciples in Jerusalem was increasing greatly, and a large number of priests began obeying﻿* the faith. 
Stephen Arrested
8 Now Stephen, full of grace and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people. 9 But some of those from the Synagogue of the Freedmen (⌊as it was called⌋), both Cyrenians and Alexandrians, and those from Cilicia and Asia, stood up and﻿* disputed with Stephen. 10 And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he was speaking. 11 Then they secretly instigated men who said, “We have heard him speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God!” 12 And they incited the people and the elders and the scribes, and they came up and﻿* seized him and brought him﻿* to the Sanhedrin. 13 And they put forward false witnesses who said, “This man does not stop speaking words against the holy place and the law! 14 For we have heard him saying that this Nazarene Jesus will destroy this place and will change the customs that Moses handed down to us.” 15 And as they﻿* looked intently at him, all those who were sitting in the Sanhedrin saw his face was like the face of an angel. 
Stephen’s Defense
7 And the high priest said, “Is it so concerning these things?” 2 So he said, “Men—brothers and fathers—listen: The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham while he﻿* was in Mesopotamia, before he settled in Haran, 3 and said to him, ‘Go out from your land and from your relatives and come to the land that I will show you.’ 4 Then he went out from the land of the Chaldeans and﻿* settled in Haran. And from there, after his father died, he caused him to move to this land in which you now live. 5 And he did not give him an inheritance in it—not even a footstep—and he promised to give it﻿* to him for his possession, and to his descendants after him, ⌊although he did not have⌋﻿* a child. 6 But God spoke like this: ‘His descendants will be foreigners in a foreign land, and they will enslave them and mistreat them﻿* four hundred years, 7 and the nation ⌊that⌋ they will serve as slaves, I will judge,’ God said, ‘and after these things they will come out and will worship me in this place.’ 8 And he gave him the covenant of circumcision, and so he became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac did so with﻿* Jacob, and Jacob did so with﻿* the twelve patriarchs. 9 And the patriarchs, because they﻿* were jealous of Joseph, sold him﻿* into Egypt. And God was with him, 10 and rescued him from all his afflictions and granted him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt. And he appointed him ruler over Egypt and all his household. 11 And a famine came over all Egypt and Canaan and great affliction, and our fathers could not find food. 12 So when﻿* Jacob heard there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first. 13 And on the second visit﻿* Joseph was made known to his brothers, and the family of Joseph became known to Pharaoh. 14 So Joseph sent and﻿* summoned his father Jacob and all his﻿* relatives, seventy-five persons in all. 15 And Jacob went down to Egypt and died, he and our fathers. 16 And they were brought back to Shechem and buried in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem. 
17 “But as the time of the promise that God had made to Abraham was drawing near, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt 18 until another king arose over Egypt who did not know Joseph. 19 This man deceitfully took advantage of our﻿* people and﻿* mistreated our ancestors, ⌊causing them to abandon their infants⌋ so that they would not be kept alive. 20 At this time Moses was born, and he was beautiful to God. ⌊He⌋ was brought up for three months in his﻿* father’s house, 21 and when﻿* he was abandoned, the daughter of Pharaoh took him up and brought him up ⌊as her own son⌋. 22 And Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was powerful in his words and deeds. 
23 “But when ⌊he was forty years old⌋, it entered in his heart to visit his brothers, the sons of Israel. 24 And when he﻿* saw one of them being unjustly harmed, he defended him﻿* and ⌊avenged⌋ the one who had been oppressed by﻿* striking down the Egyptian. 25 And he thought his﻿* brothers would understand that God was granting deliverance to them by his hand, but they did not understand. 26 And on the following day, he made an appearance to them while they﻿* were fighting and was attempting to reconcile﻿* them in peace, saying, ‘Men and brothers, why are you doing wrong to one another?’ 27 But the one who was doing wrong to his﻿* neighbor pushed him aside, saying, ‘Who appointed you a ruler and a judge over us? 28 You do not want to do away with me ⌊the same way⌋ you did away with the Egyptian yesterday, do you?’ 29 And at this statement, Moses fled and became a foreigner in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons. 
30 “And when﻿* forty years had been completed, an angel appeared to him in the desert of Mount Sinai in the flame of a burning bush. 31 And when﻿* Moses saw it,* he was astonished at the sight, and when﻿* he approached to look at it,* the voice of the Lord came: 32 ‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob!’ So Moses began trembling and﻿* did not dare to look at it.* 33 And the Lord said to him, ‘Untie the sandals from your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground. 34 ⌊I have certainly seen⌋ the mistreatment of my people who are in Egypt and have heard their groaning, and I have come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send you to Egypt.’ 35 This Moses whom they had repudiated, saying, ‘Who appointed you a ruler and a judge?’—this man God sent as both ruler and redeemer with ⌊the help⌋ of the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 36 This man led them out, performing wonders and signs in the land of Egypt and at the Red Sea and in the wilderness for forty years. 
37 “This is the Moses who said to the sons of Israel, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers.’ 38 This is the one who was in the congregation in the wilderness with the angel who spoke to him at Mount Sinai, and who with our fathers received living oracles to give to us, 39 to whom our fathers were not willing to become obedient, but rejected him﻿* and turned back in their hearts to Egypt, 40 saying to Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go on before us! For this Moses, who led us out from the land of Egypt—we do not know what has happened to him!’ 41 And they manufactured a calf in those days, and offered up a sacrifice to the idol, and began rejoicing﻿* in the works of their hands. 42 But God turned away and gave them over to worship the host of heaven, just as it is written in the book of the prophets: 
‘You did not bring offerings and sacrifices to me 
for forty years in the wilderness, did you,* house of Israel? 
43 And you took along the tabernacle of Moloch 
and the star of the god Rephan, 
the images that you made, to worship them, 
and I will deport you beyond Babylon!’ 
44 The tabernacle of the testimony ⌊belonged⌋ to our fathers in the wilderness, just as the one who spoke to Moses directed him﻿* to make it according to the design that he had seen, 45 and which, after﻿* receiving it﻿* in turn, our fathers brought in with Joshua ⌊when they dispossessed the⌋ nations that God drove out from the presence of our fathers, until the days of David, 46 who found favor in the sight of God and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob. 47 But Solomon built a house for him. 48 But the Most High does not live in houses made by human hands, just as the prophet says, 
49 ‘Heaven is my throne 
and earth is the footstool for my feet. 
What kind of house will you build for me, says the Lord, 
or what is the place of my rest? 
50 Did not my hand make all these things?’ 
51 “You stiff-necked people and uncircumcised in hearts and in your﻿* ears! You constantly resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so also do you! 52 Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they killed those who announced beforehand about the coming of the Righteous One, whose betrayers and murderers you have now become, 53 you who received the law by directions of angels and have not observed it!” 
Stephen’s Martyrdom
54 Now when they﻿* heard these things, they were infuriated in their hearts and gnashed their﻿* teeth at him. 55 But he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked intently into heaven and﻿* saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. 56 And he said, “Behold, I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!” 57 But crying out with a loud voice, they stopped their ears and rushed at him with one purpose. 58 And after they﻿* had driven him﻿* out of the city, they began to stone﻿* him,* and the witnesses laid aside their cloaks at the feet of a young man named Saul. 59 And they kept on stoning Stephen as he﻿* was calling out and saying, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!” 60 And falling to his﻿* knees, he cried out with a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them!” And after he﻿* said this, he fell asleep. 
Saul Attempts to Destroy the Church
8 And Saul was agreeing with his murder. Now there happened on that day a great persecution against the church in Jerusalem, and they were all scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles. 2 And devout men buried Stephen and made loud lamentation over him. 3 But Saul was attempting to destroy the church. Entering ⌊house after house⌋, he dragged off both men and women and﻿* delivered them﻿* to prison. 
Philip Proclaims Christ in Samaria
4 Now those who had been scattered went about proclaiming the good news of the word. 5 And Philip came down to the city of Samaria and﻿* began proclaiming﻿* the Christ to them. 6 And the crowds with one mind were paying attention to what was being said by Philip, as they heard him﻿* and saw the signs that he was performing. 7 For many of those who had unclean spirits, they were coming out of them,* crying out with a loud voice, and many who were paralyzed and lame were healed. 8 And there was great joy in that city. 
Simon the Magician
9 Now a certain man ⌊named⌋ Simon had been in the city practicing magic and astonishing the people of Samaria, saying he was someone great. 10 They were all paying attention to ⌊him⌋, from the least to the greatest, saying, “This man is the power of God that is called ‘Great.’ ” 11 And they were paying attention to him because for a long time he had astonished them with his﻿* magic. 12 But when they believed Philip as he﻿* was proclaiming the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, both men and women were being baptized. 13 And Simon himself also believed, and after he﻿* was baptized he was ⌊keeping close company with⌋ Philip. And when he﻿* saw the signs and great miracles that were taking place, he was astonished. 
14 Now when﻿* the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them, 15 who went down and﻿* prayed for them so that they would receive the Holy Spirit. 16 (For he had not yet fallen on any of them, ⌊but they had only been baptized⌋ in the name of the Lord Jesus.) 17 Then they placed their﻿* hands on them and they received the Holy Spirit. 
18 Now Simon, when he﻿* saw that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, offered them money, 19 saying, “Give to me also this power, so that whomever I place my﻿* hands on may receive the Holy Spirit!” 20 But Peter said to him, “May your silver ⌊be destroyed along with you⌋, because you thought ⌊you could acquire⌋ the gift of God by means of money! 21 ⌊You have no⌋ part or share in this matter, because your heart is not right before God. 22 Therefore repent of this wickedness of yours, and ask the Lord if perhaps the intent of your heart may be forgiven you!” 23 For I see you are in ⌊a state of bitter envy⌋ and ⌊bound by unrighteousness⌋.” 24 But Simon answered and﻿* said, “You pray to the Lord for me so that nothing of what you have said will come upon me.” 25 So when﻿* they had solemnly testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they turned back toward Jerusalem, and were proclaiming the good news to many villages of the Samaritans. 
Philip and the Ethiopian Eunuch
26 Now an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, “Get up and go toward the south on the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.” (This is a desert road.) 27 And he got up and﻿* went, and behold, there was a man, an Ethiopian eunuch (a court official of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasury) who had come to worship in Jerusalem 28 and was returning and sitting in his chariot, and reading aloud the prophet Isaiah. 29 And the Spirit said to Philip, “Approach and join this chariot.” 30 So Philip ran up to it﻿* and﻿* heard him reading aloud Isaiah the prophet and said, “So then, do you understand what you are reading?” 31 And he said, “So how could I, unless someone will guide me?” And he invited Philip to come up and﻿* sit with him. 32 Now the passage of scripture that he was reading aloud was this: 
“He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, 
and like a lamb before its shearer is silent, 
so he did not open his mouth. 
33 In his﻿* humiliation justice was taken from him. 
Who can describe his ⌊descendants⌋? 
For his life was taken away from the earth.” 
34 And the eunuch answered and﻿* said to Philip, “I ask you, about whom does the prophet say this—about himself or about someone else?” 35 So Philip opened his mouth and beginning from this scripture, proclaimed the good news to him about Jesus. 36 And as they were traveling down the road, they came to some water. And the eunuch said, “Look! Water! What prevents me from being baptized?” 38 And he ordered the chariot to stop, and they both went down into the water—Philip and the eunuch—and he baptized him. 39 And when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord carried Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him any longer, for he went on his way rejoicing. 40 But Philip found himself at Azotus, and as he﻿* passed through, he proclaimed the good news to all the towns until he came to Caesarea. 
Saul’s Conversion on the Damascus Road
9 But Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 2 and﻿* asked for letters from him to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any who were of the Way, both men and women, he could bring them﻿* tied up to Jerusalem. 3 Now as he proceeded, it happened that when he approached Damascus, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him. 4 And falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” 5 So he said, “Who are you, Lord?” And he said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting! 6 But get up and enter into the city, and it will be told to you ⌊what you must do⌋.” 7 (Now the men who were traveling together with him stood speechless, because they﻿* heard the voice but saw no one.) 8 So Saul got up from the ground, but although﻿* his eyes were open he could see nothing. And leading him by the hand, they brought him into Damascus. 9 And he was ⌊unable to see⌋ for three days, and he did not eat or drink. 
Ananias Sent to Saul
10 Now there was a certain disciple in Damascus ⌊named⌋ Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias!” And he said, “Behold, here I am, Lord!” 11 And the Lord said to him, “Get up, go to the street called ‘Straight’ and in the house of Judas look for ⌊a man named Saul from Tarsus⌋. For behold, he is praying, 12 and he has seen in a vision a man ⌊named⌋ Ananias coming in and placing hands on him so that he may regain his sight.” 13 But Ananias replied, “Lord, I have heard from many people about this man, how much harm he has done to your saints in Jerusalem, 14 and here he has authority from the chief priests to tie up all who call upon your name!” 15 But the Lord said to him, “Go, because this man is my chosen instrument to carry my name before Gentiles and kings and the sons of Israel. 16 For I will show him how much he must suffer for the sake of my name.” 17 So Ananias departed and entered into the house, and placing his﻿* hands on him, he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road by which you came, has sent me so that you may regain your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.” 18 And immediately something like scales fell from his eyes and he regained his sight and got up and﻿* was baptized, 19 and after﻿* taking food, he regained his strength. And he was with the disciples in Damascus several days. 
Saul Proclaims Christ in Damascus
20 And immediately he began proclaiming﻿* Jesus in the synagogues: “This one is the Son of God!” 21 And all who heard him﻿* were amazed, and were saying, “Is this not the one who was wreaking havoc in Jerusalem on those who call upon this name, and had come here for this reason, that he could bring them tied up to the chief priests?” 22 But Saul was increasing in strength even more, and was confounding the Jews who lived in Damascus by﻿* proving that this one is the Christ. 
23 And when many days had elapsed, the Jews plotted to do away with him. 24 But their plot became known to Saul, and they were also watching the gates both day and night so that they could do away with him. 25 But his disciples took him﻿* at night and﻿* let him down through the wall by﻿* lowering him﻿* in a basket. 
Saul in Jerusalem
26 And when he﻿* arrived in Jerusalem, he was attempting to associate with the disciples, and they were all afraid of him, because they﻿* did not believe that he was a disciple. 27 But Barnabas took him and﻿* brought him﻿* to the apostles and related to them how he had seen the Lord on the road and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus. 28 And he was going in and going out among them in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord. 29 And he was speaking and debating with the ⌊Greek-speaking Jews⌋, but they were trying to do away with him. 30 And when﻿* the brothers found out, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus. 
31 Then the church throughout all of Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being strengthened. And living in the fear of the Lord and the encouragement of the Holy Spirit, it was increasing in numbers.* 
Aeneas Healed
32 Now it happened that as﻿* Peter was traveling through all the places,* he also came down to the saints who lived in Lydda. 33 And he found there a certain man ⌊named⌋ Aeneas who was paralyzed, who had been lying on a mat for eight years. 34 And Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you! Get up and make your bed yourself!” And immediately he got up. 35 And all those who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him, who all﻿* indeed turned to the Lord. 
Dorcas Raised
36 Now in Joppa there was a certain female disciple ⌊named⌋ Tabitha (which translated means “Dorcas”). She was full of good deeds and charitable giving which she was constantly doing.* 37 Now it happened that in those days after﻿* becoming sick, she died. And after﻿* washing her,* they placed her in an upstairs room. 38 And because﻿* Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, when they﻿* heard that Peter was in ⌊Lydda⌋, sent two men to him, urging, “Do not delay to come to us!” 39 So Peter got up and﻿* accompanied them. When he﻿* arrived, they brought him﻿* up to the upstairs room, and all the widows came to him, weeping and showing him﻿* tunics and other clothing that Dorcas used to make while she﻿* was with them. 40 But Peter sent them all outside, and, falling to his﻿* knees, he prayed. And turning toward the body, he said, “Tabitha, get up!” And she opened her eyes, and when she﻿* saw Peter, she sat up. 41 And he gave her his hand and﻿* raised her up. And he called the saints and the widows and﻿* presented her alive. 42 And it became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord. 43 And it happened that he stayed many days in Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner. 
Cornelius Has a Vision
10 Now there was a certain man in Caesarea ⌊named⌋ Cornelius, a centurion of what was called the Italian Cohort, 2 devout and fearing God together with all his household, doing many charitable deeds for the people and praying to God ⌊continually⌋. 3 About the ninth hour of the day, he saw clearly in a vision an angel of God coming to him and saying to him, “Cornelius.” 4 And he stared at him and became terrified and﻿* said, “What is it, Lord?” And he said to him, “Your prayers and your charitable deeds have gone up for a memorial offering before God. 5 And now, send men to Joppa and summon a certain Simon, who is also called Peter. 6 This man is staying as a guest with a certain Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the sea.” 7 And when the angel who spoke to him departed, he summoned two of the household slaves and a devout soldier from those who attended him, 8 and after he﻿* had explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa. 
Peter Has a Vision
9 And the next day, as﻿* they were on their way and approaching the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about the sixth hour. 10 And he became hungry and wanted to eat. But while﻿* they were preparing the food,* a trance came over him. 11 And he saw heaven opened and an object something like a large sheet coming down, being let down to the earth by its four corners, 12 in which were all the four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth and birds of the sky. 13 And a voice came to him, “Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!” 14 But Peter said, “Certainly not, Lord! For I have never eaten anything common and unclean!” 15 And the voice came again to him for the second time: “The things which God has made clean, you must not consider unclean!” 16 And this happened three times, and immediately the object was taken up into heaven. 
17 Now while Peter was greatly perplexed within himself as to what the vision that he had seen might be, behold, the men who had been sent by Cornelius, having found the house of Simon by asking around, stood at the gate. 18 And they called out and﻿* asked if Simon who was also called Peter was staying there as a guest. 19 And while﻿* Peter was reflecting about the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, men are looking for you. 20 But get up, go down, and go with them—not hesitating at all, because I have sent them.” 21 So Peter went down to the men and﻿* said, “Behold, I am he whom you are looking for! What is the reason for which you have come?” 22 And they said, “Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous and God-fearing man—and well spoken of by the whole nation of the Jews—was directed by a holy angel to summon you to his house and to hear words from you.” 23 So he invited them in and﻿* entertained them as guests, and on the next day he got up and﻿* went away with them. And some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him. 24 And on the next day he entered into Caesarea. 
Peter Visits Cornelius
Now Cornelius was waiting for them, and﻿* had called together his relatives and close friends. 25 So it happened that when Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell at his﻿* feet, and﻿* worshiped him.* 26 But Peter helped him up, saying, “Get up! I myself am also a man!” 27 And as he﻿* conversed with him, he went in and found many people gathered. 28 And he said to them, “You know that it is forbidden for a Jewish man to associate with or to approach a foreigner. And to me God has shown that I should call no man common or unclean. 29 Therefore—and without raising any objection—I came when I﻿* was sent for. So I ask for what reason you sent for me.” 
30 And Cornelius said, “⌊Four days ago at this hour⌋, the ninth, I was praying in my house. And behold, a man in shining clothing stood before me 31 and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard, and your charitable deeds have been remembered before God. 32 Therefore send to Joppa and summon Simon who is also called Peter. This man is staying as a guest in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea. 33 Therefore I sent for you at once, and you ⌊were kind enough to come⌋. So now we all are present before God to hear all the things that have been commanded to you by the Lord.” 
34 So Peter opened his﻿* mouth and﻿* said, “In truth I understand that God is not one who shows partiality, 35 but in every nation the one who fears him and who does what is right is acceptable to him. 36 As for﻿* the message that he sent to the sons of Israel, proclaiming the good news of peace through Jesus Christ—this one is Lord of all—37 you know the thing that happened throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism that John proclaimed: 38 Jesus of Nazareth—how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with him. 39 And we are witnesses of all the things that he did both in the land of the Judeans and in Jerusalem, whom they also executed by﻿* hanging him﻿* on a tree. 40 God raised this one up on the third day and granted that he should become visible, 41 not to all the people but to us who had been chosen beforehand by God as witnesses, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. 42 And he commanded us to preach to the people and to testify solemnly that this one is the one appointed by God as judge of the living and of the dead. 43 To this one all the prophets testify, that through his name everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins.” 
The Holy Spirit Given to Gentiles
44 While﻿* Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who were listening to the message. 45 And those believers from the circumcision who had accompanied Peter were astonished that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles, 46 for they heard them speaking in tongues and glorifying God. Then Peter said, 47 “Surely no one can withhold the water for these people to be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit as we also did!” 48 So he ordered that they be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay for several days. 
Peter’s Explanation to the Church in Jerusalem
11 Now the apostles and the brothers who were throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles also had accepted the word of God. 2 So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, those of the circumcision took issue with him, 3 saying, “You went to men ⌊who were uncircumcised⌋ and ate with them!” 4 But Peter began and﻿* explained it﻿* to them in an orderly sequence, saying, 5 “I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision—an object something like a large sheet coming down, being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came to me. 6 As I﻿* looked intently into it, I was considering it,* and I saw the four-footed animals of the earth and the wild animals and the reptiles and the birds of the sky. 7 And I also heard a voice saying to me, ‘Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!’ 8 But I said, ‘Certainly not, Lord! For nothing common or unclean has ever entered into my mouth!’ 9 But the voice replied from heaven for the second time, ‘The things which God has made clean, you must not consider unclean!’ 10 And this happened three times, and everything was pulled up into heaven again. 11 And behold, at once three men who had been sent to me from Caesarea approached the house in which we were staying.* 12 And the Spirit told me to accompany them, not hesitating at all. So these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the man’s house. 13 And he reported to us how he had seen the angel standing in his house and saying, ‘Send to Joppa and summon Simon, who is also called Peter, 14 who will speak words to you by which you will be saved, you and all your household.’ 15 And as I was beginning to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, just as also on us at the beginning. 16 And I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’ 17 Therefore if God gave them the same gift as also to us when we﻿* believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to be able to hinder God?” 18 And when they﻿* heard these things, they became silent﻿* and praised God, saying, “Then God has granted the repentance leading to life to the Gentiles also!” 
Developments in the Church in Antioch
19 Now those who had been scattered because of the persecution that took place over Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, proclaiming the message to no one except Jews alone. 20 But some of them were men from Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they﻿* came to Antioch, began to speak﻿* to the Hellenists﻿* also, proclaiming the good news about the Lord Jesus. 21 And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a large number who believed turned to the Lord. 22 ⌊And the report came to the attention⌋ of the church that was in Jerusalem about them, and they sent out Barnabas as far as Antioch, 23 who, when he﻿* arrived and saw the grace of God, rejoiced and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with ⌊devoted hearts⌋, 24 because he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a large number were added to the Lord. 25 So he departed for Tarsus to look for Saul. 26 And when he﻿* found him,* he brought him﻿* to Antioch. And it happened to them also that they met together for a whole year with the church and taught a large number of people.* And in Antioch the disciples were first called Christians. 
27 Now in those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 28 And one of them ⌊named⌋ Agabus stood up and﻿* indicated by the Spirit that a great famine was about to come over the whole inhabited earth (which took place in the time of Claudius). 29 So from the disciples, ⌊according to their ability to give⌋, each one of them determined to send financial aid﻿* for support to the brothers who lived in Judea, 30 which they also did, sending the aid﻿* to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul. 
Herod Kills James and Imprisons Peter
12 Now at that time, Herod the king laid hands on some of those from the church to harm them.* 2 So he executed James the brother of John with a sword. 3 And when he﻿* saw that it was pleasing to the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (⌊Now this was during the feast⌋ of Unleavened Bread.) 4 After he﻿* had arrested ⌊him⌋, he also put him﻿* in prison, handing him﻿* over to four squads of soldiers to guard him, intending to bring him ⌊out for public trial⌋ after the Passover. 5 Thus Peter was kept in the prison, but prayer was fervently being made to God by the church for him. 
Peter Rescued by an Angel
6 Now when Herod was about to bring him out, on that very night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and guards before the door were watching the prison. 7 And behold, an angel of the Lord stood near him,* and a light shone in the prison cell. And striking Peter’s side, he woke him up, saying, “Get up ⌊quickly⌋!” And his chains fell off of his﻿* hands. 8 And the angel said to him, “Gird yourself and put on your sandals!” And he did so. And he said to him, “Wrap your cloak around you and follow me!” 9 And he went out and﻿* was following him.* And he did not know that what was being done by the angel was real, but was thinking he was seeing a vision. 10 And after they﻿* had passed the first and second guard, they came to the iron gate that leads to the city, which opened for them by itself, and they went out and﻿* went forward along one narrow street, and at once the angel departed from him. 
11 And when﻿* Peter came to himself, he said, “Now I know truly that the Lord has sent out his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and all ⌊that the Jewish people expected⌋!” 12 And when he﻿* realized this,* he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John (who is also called Mark), where many people were gathered together and were praying. 13 And when﻿* he knocked at the door of the gateway, a female slave ⌊named⌋ Rhoda came up to answer. 14 And recognizing Peter’s voice, because of her﻿* joy she did not open the gate, but ran in and﻿* announced that Peter was standing at the gate. 15 But they said to her, “You are out of your mind!” But she kept insisting﻿* it was so. And they kept saying,* “It is his angel!” 16 But Peter was continuing to knock, and when they﻿* opened the door﻿* they saw him and were astonished. 17 But motioning to them with his﻿* hand to be silent, he related to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, “Report these things to James and to the brothers,” and he departed and﻿* went to another place. 
18 Now when﻿* day came, there was not a little commotion among the soldiers as to what then had become of Peter. 19 And when﻿* Herod had searched for him and did not find him,* he questioned the guards and﻿* ordered that they be led away to execution. And he came down from Judea to Caesarea and﻿* stayed there. 
Herod’s Gruesome Death
20 Now he was very angry with the Tyrians and Sidonians. So they came to him with one purpose, and after﻿* persuading Blastus, ⌊the king’s chamberlain⌋, they asked for peace, because their country was supported with food from the king’s country. 21 So on an appointed day Herod, after﻿* putting on royal clothing and sitting down on the judgment seat, began to deliver a public address to them. 22 But the people began to call out loudly,* “The voice of a god and not of a man!” 23 And immediately an angel of the Lord struck him down ⌊because⌋ he did not give the glory to God. And he was eaten by worms and﻿* died. 24 But the word of God kept on increasing﻿* and multiplying. 
25 So Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem when they﻿* had completed their﻿* service, having taken along with them﻿* John (who is also called Mark). 
Barnabas and Saul Sent Out from Antioch
13 Now there were prophets and teachers in Antioch in the church that was there: Barnabas, and Simeon (who was called Niger), and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen (a close friend of Herod the tetrarch), and Saul. 2 And while﻿* they were serving the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart now for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.” 3 Then, after they﻿* had fasted and prayed and placed their﻿* hands on them, they sent them﻿* away. 
Confronting a Magician on Cyprus
4 Therefore, sent out by the Holy Spirit, they came down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed away to Cyprus. 5 And when they﻿* came to Salamis, they began to proclaim the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they also had John as assistant. 6 And when they﻿* had crossed over the whole island as far as Paphos, they found a certain man, a magician, a Jewish false prophet whose name was Bar-Jesus,7 who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul and﻿* wished to hear the word of God. 8 But Elymas the magician (for his name is translated in this way) opposed them, attempting to turn the proconsul away from the faith. 9 But Saul (also called Paul), filled with the Holy Spirit, looked intently at him 10 and﻿* said, “O you who are full of all deceit and of all unscrupulousness, you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness! Will you not stop making crooked the straight paths of the Lord! 11 And now behold, the hand of the Lord is against you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun ⌊for a while⌋. And immediately mist and darkness fell over him, and he was going around looking for people﻿* to lead him﻿* by the hand. 12 Then when﻿* the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, because he﻿* was astounded at the teaching about﻿* the Lord. 
Preaching in the Synagogue at Pisidian Antioch
13 Now ⌊Paul and his companions⌋ put out to sea from Paphos and﻿* came to Perga in Pamphylia, but John departed from them and﻿* returned to Jerusalem. 14 And they went on from Perga and﻿* arrived at Pisidian Antioch. And they entered into the synagogue on the day of the Sabbath and﻿* sat down. 15 So after the reading from the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent word﻿* to them, saying, “Men and brothers, if there is any message of exhortation by you for the people, say it.”* 
16 So Paul stood up,* and motioning with his﻿* hand, he said, “Israelite men, and those who fear God, listen! 17 The God of this people Israel chose our fathers and exalted the people during their﻿* stay in the land of Egypt, and with uplifted arm he led them out of it. 18 And for a period of time of about forty years, he put up with them in the wilderness. 19 And after﻿* destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave their land to his people﻿* as an inheritance. 20 This took﻿* about four hundred and fifty years. And after these things, he gave them﻿* judges until Samuel the prophet. 21 And then they asked for a king, and God gave them Saul son of Kish, a man from the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years. 22 And after﻿* removing him, he raised up David for their king, about whom he also said, testifying, ‘I have found David the son of Jesse to be a man in accordance with my heart, who will carry out all my will.’ 23 From the descendants of this man, according to his promise, God brought to Israel a Savior, Jesus. 24 Before ⌊his coming⌋ John had publicly proclaimed﻿* a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. 25 But while John was completing his﻿* mission, he said, ‘What do you suppose me to be? I am not he! But behold, one is coming after me of whom I am not worthy to untie the sandals of his﻿* feet!’ 
26 “Men and brothers, sons of the family of Abraham and those among you who fear God—to us the message of this salvation has been sent! 27 For those who live in Jerusalem and their rulers, because they﻿* did not recognize this one, and the voices of the prophets that are read on every Sabbath, fulfilled them﻿* by﻿* condemning him.* 28 And although they﻿* found no charge worthy of death, they asked Pilate that he be executed. 29 And when they had carried out all the things that were written about him, they took him﻿* down from the tree and﻿* placed him﻿* in a tomb. 30 But God raised him from the dead, 31 who appeared for many days to those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem—who are now his witnesses to the people. 32 And we proclaim the good news to you: that the promise that was made to the fathers, 33 this promise God has fulfilled to our children by﻿* raising Jesus, as it is also written in the second psalm, 
‘You are my Son; 
today I have fathered you.’ 
34 But that he has raised him from the dead, no more going to return to decay, he has spoken in this way: ‘I will give you the reliable divine decrees of David.’ 35 Therefore he also says in another psalm,* 
‘You will not permit your Holy One to experience decay.’ 
36 For David, after﻿* serving the purpose of God in his own generation, fell asleep and ⌊was buried with⌋ his fathers, and experienced decay. 37 But he whom God raised up did not experience decay. 
38 “Therefore let it be known to you, men and brothers, that through this one forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you, and from all the things from which you were not able to be justified by the law of Moses, 39 by this one everyone who believes is justified! 40 Watch out, therefore, lest what is stated by the prophets come upon you:* 
41 ‘Look, you scoffers, 
and be astonished and perish! 
For I am doing a work in your days, 
a work that you would never believe 
even if someone were to tell it﻿* to you.’ ” 
Response to the Message in Pisidian Antioch
42 And as﻿* they were going out, they began urging﻿* that these things be spoken about to them on the next Sabbath. 43 And after﻿* the synagogue had broken up, many of the Jews and the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who were speaking to them and﻿* were persuading them to continue in the grace of God. 44 And on the coming Sabbath, nearly the whole city came together to hear the word of the Lord. 45 But when﻿* the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy, and began contradicting what was being said by Paul by﻿* reviling him.* 46 Both Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly and﻿* said, “It was necessary that the word of God be spoken first to you, since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life! Behold, we are turning to the Gentiles! 47 For so the Lord has commanded us: 
‘I have appointed you ⌊to be⌋ a light for the Gentiles, 
⌊that you would bring⌋ salvation to the end of the earth.’ 
48 And when﻿* the Gentiles heard this,* they began to rejoice﻿* and to glorify the word of the Lord. And all those who were designated for eternal life believed. 49 So the word of the Lord was carried through the whole region. 50 But the Jews incited the devout women of high social standing and the most prominent men of the city, and stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas and threw them out of their district. 51 So after﻿* shaking off the dust from their feet against them, they went to Iconium. 52 And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit. 
Preaching in Iconium
14 Now it happened that in Iconium they entered ⌊together⌋ into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke in such a way that a large number of both Jews and Greeks believed. 2 But the Jews who were disobedient stirred up and ⌊poisoned the minds⌋ of the Gentiles against the brothers. 3 So they stayed there﻿* for a considerable time, speaking boldly for the Lord, who testified to the message of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be performed through their hands. 4 But the population of the city was divided, and ⌊some⌋ were with the Jews ⌊and some⌋ with the apostles. 5 So when an inclination took place on the part of both the Gentiles and the Jews, together with their rulers, to mistreat them﻿* and to stone them, 6 they became aware of it﻿* and﻿* fled to the Lycaonian cities—Lystra and Derbe and the surrounding region. 7 And there they were continuing to proclaim the good news. 
Mistaken for Gods in Lystra
8 And in Lystra a certain man was sitting powerless in his feet, lame from ⌊birth⌋, who had never walked. 9 This man listened while﻿* Paul was speaking. ⌊Paul⌋, looking intently at him and seeing that he had faith to be healed, 10 said with a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet!” And he leaped up and began walking.* 11 And when﻿* the crowds saw what Paul had done, they raised their voices in the Lycaonian language, saying, “The gods have become like men and﻿* have come down to us!” 12 And they began calling﻿* Barnabas Zeus and Paul Hermes, because he was the ⌊principal speaker⌋. 13 And the priest of the temple﻿* of Zeus that was just outside the city brought bulls and garlands to the gates and﻿* was wanting to offer sacrifice, along with the crowds. 14 But when﻿* the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard about it,* they tore their clothing and﻿* rushed out into the crowd, shouting 15 and saying, “Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men with the same nature as you, proclaiming the good news that you should turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things that are in them—16 who in generations that are past permitted all the nations to go their own ways. 17 And yet he did not leave himself without witness by﻿* doing good, giving you rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you﻿* with food and your hearts with gladness.” 18 And although﻿* they said these things, only with difficulty did they dissuade the crowds from offering sacrifice to them. 
19 But Jews arrived from Antioch and Iconium, and when they﻿* had won over the crowds and stoned Paul, they dragged him﻿* outside the city, thinking he was dead. 20 But after﻿* the disciples surrounded him, he got up and﻿* went into the city. And on the next day he departed with Barnabas for Derbe. 
Paul and Barnabas Return to Antioch in Syria
21 And after they﻿* had proclaimed the good news in that city and made many disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch, 22 strengthening the souls of the disciples, encouraging them﻿* to continue in the faith and saying,* “Through many persecutions it is necessary for us to enter into the kingdom of God.” 23 And when they﻿* had appointed elders for them in every church, after﻿* praying with fasting, they entrusted them to the Lord, in whom they had believed. 24 And they passed through Pisidia and﻿* came to Pamphylia. 25 And after﻿* they proclaimed the message in Perga, they went down to Attalia, 26 and from there they sailed away to Antioch where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work that they had completed. 27 And when they﻿* arrived and called the church together, they reported all that God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith for the Gentiles. 28 And they stayed no little time with the disciples. 
The Jerusalem Council
15 And some men came down from Judea and﻿* began teaching﻿* the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom prescribed by Moses, you cannot be saved.” 2 And after﻿* there was no little strife and debate by Paul and Barnabas against them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas and some others from among them to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem concerning this issue. 3 So they were sent on their way by the church, and﻿* passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, telling in detail the conversion of the Gentiles and bringing great joy to all the brothers. 4 And when they﻿* arrived in Jerusalem, they were received by the church and the apostles and the elders, and reported all that God had done with them. 5 But some of those who had believed from the party of the Pharisees stood up, saying, “It is necessary to circumcise them and to command them﻿* to observe the law of Moses!” 
6 Both the apostles and the elders assembled to deliberate concerning this matter. 7 And after﻿* there was much debate, Peter stood up and﻿* said to them, “Men and brothers, you know that in the early days God chose among you through my mouth that the Gentiles should hear the message of the gospel and believe. 8 And God, who knows the heart, testified to them by﻿* giving them﻿* the Holy Spirit, just as he also did to us. 9 And he made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith. 10 So now why are you putting God to the test by﻿* placing on the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear? 11 But we believe we will be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus in ⌊the same⌋ way those also are.” 12 And the whole group became silent and listened to Barnabas and Paul describing all the signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them. 13 And after they had stopped speaking, James answered, saying, “Men and brothers, listen to me! 14 Simeon has described how God first concerned himself to take from among the Gentiles a people for his name. 15 And with this the words of the prophets agree, just as it is written: 
16 ‘After these things I will return 
and build up again the tent of David that has fallen, 
and the parts of it that had been torn down I will build up again 
and will restore it, 
17 so that the rest of humanity may seek the Lord, 
even all the Gentiles ⌊who are called by my name⌋, 
says the Lord, who makes these things 18 known from of old.’ 
19 Therefore I conclude we should not cause difficulty for those from among the Gentiles who turn to God, 20 but we should write a letter to them to abstain from the pollution of idols and from sexual immorality and from what has been strangled and from blood. 21 For Moses has those who proclaim him in every city from ancient generations, because he﻿* is read aloud in the synagogues on every Sabbath.” 
The Letter from the Council
22 Then it seemed best to the apostles and the elders, together with the whole church, to send men chosen from among them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas—Judas who was called Barsabbas and Silas, men who were leaders among the brothers—23 writing this letter﻿* ⌊to be delivered by them⌋: 
The apostles and the elders, brothers. 
To the brothers who are from among the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia. 
Greetings! 
24 Because we have heard that some have gone out from among us—to whom we gave no orders—and﻿* have thrown you into confusion by words upsetting your ⌊minds⌋, 25 it seemed best to us, ⌊having reached a unanimous decision⌋, and﻿* having chosen men, to send them﻿* to you together with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul, 26 men who have risked their lives on behalf of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 27 Therefore we have sent Judas and Silas, and they will report the same things by word of mouth. 28 For it seemed best to the Holy Spirit and to us to place on you no greater burden except these necessary things: 29 that you abstain from food sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from what has been strangled, and from sexual immorality. If you﻿* keep yourselves from ⌊these things⌋ you will do well. 
Farewell. 
The Letter Is Delivered to Antioch
30 So when﻿* they were sent off, they came down to Antioch, and after﻿* calling together the community, they delivered the letter. 31 And when they﻿* read it﻿* aloud, they rejoiced at the encouragement. 32 Both Judas and Silas, who were also prophets themselves, encouraged and strengthened the brothers by a long message. 33 And after﻿* spending some time, they were sent away in peace from the brothers to those who had sent them. 35 But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch teaching and proclaiming the word of the Lord with many others also. 
Paul and Barnabas Disagree and Part Company
36 And after some days, Paul said to Barnabas, “Come then, let us return and﻿* visit the brothers in every town in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing.” 37 Now Barnabas wanted to take John who was called Mark along also, 38 but Paul held the opinion they should not take this one along, who departed from them in Pamphylia and did not accompany them in the work. 39 And a sharp disagreement took place, so that they separated from one another. And Barnabas took along Mark and﻿* sailed away to Cyprus, 40 but Paul chose Silas and﻿* departed, after﻿* being commended to the grace of the Lord by the brothers. 41 And he traveled through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches. 
Timothy Accompanies Paul and Silas
16 And he came also to Derbe and to Lystra. And behold, a certain disciple was there ⌊named⌋ Timothy, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of a Greek father, 2 who was well spoken of by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium. 3 Paul wanted this one to go with him, and he took him﻿* and﻿* circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for they all knew that his father was Greek. 4 And as they went through the towns, they passed on to them to observe the rules that had been decided by the apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem. 5 So the churches were being strengthened in the faith and were growing in number every day. 
Paul’s Vision of a Man of Macedonia
6 And they traveled through the Phrygian and Galatian region, having been prevented by the Holy Spirit from speaking the message in Asia. 7 And when they﻿* came to Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them. 8 So going through Mysia, they went down to Troas. 9 And a vision appeared to Paul during the night: a certain Macedonian man was standing there and imploring him and saying, “Come over to Macedonia and﻿* help us!” 10 And when he had seen the vision, we wanted at once to go away to Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to proclaim the good news to them. 
The Conversion of Lydia at Philippi
11 So putting out to sea from Troas, we sailed a straight course to Samothrace, and on the following day to Neapolis, 12 and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of that district of Macedonia, a Roman colony. And we were staying in this city for some days. 13 And on the day of the Sabbath, we went outside the city gate beside the river, where we thought there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and﻿* spoke to the women assembled there. 14 And a certain woman ⌊named⌋ Lydia from the city of Thyatira, a merchant dealing in purple cloth who showed reverence for God, was listening. The Lord opened ⌊her⌋ heart to pay attention to what was being said by Paul. 15 And after she was baptized, and her household, she urged us,* saying, “If you consider me to be a believer in the Lord, come to my house and﻿* stay.” And she prevailed upon us. 
Paul and Silas Imprisoned
16 And it happened that as﻿* we were going to the place of prayer, a certain female slave who had a spirit of divination met us, who was bringing a large profit to her owners by﻿* fortune-telling. 17 She followed Paul and us and﻿* was crying out, saying, “These men are slaves of the Most High God, who are proclaiming to you the way of salvation!” 18 And she was doing this for many days. But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed and turning around, said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!” And it came out ⌊immediately⌋. 
19 But when﻿* her owners saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and﻿* dragged them﻿* into the marketplace before the rulers. 20 And when they﻿* had brought them to the chief magistrates, they said, “These men are throwing our city into confusion, being Jews, 21 and are proclaiming customs that are not permitted for us to accept or to practice, because we﻿* are Romans!” 22 And the crowd joined in attacking them, and the chief magistrates tore off their clothing and﻿* gave orders to beat them﻿* with rods. 23 And after they﻿* had inflicted many blows on them, they threw them﻿* into prison, giving orders to the jailer to guard them securely. 24 Having received such an order, ⌊he⌋ put them in the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks. 
The Conversion of the Philippian Jailer
25 Now about midnight, Paul and Silas were praying and﻿* singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them. 26 And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. And immediately all the doors were opened and all the bonds were unfastened. 27 And after﻿* the jailer was awake and saw the doors of the prison open, he drew his﻿* sword and﻿* was about to kill himself, because he﻿* thought the prisoners had escaped. 28 But Paul called out with a loud voice, saying, “Do no harm to yourself, for we are all here!” 29 And demanding lights, he rushed in and, ⌊beginning to tremble⌋, fell down at the feet of Paul and Silas. 30 And he brought them outside and﻿* said, “Sirs, what must I do so that I can be saved?” 31 And they said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your household!” 32 And they spoke the message of the Lord to him, together with all those in his house. 33 And he took them at that very hour of the night and﻿* washed their﻿* wounds, and he himself was baptized at once, and all those of his household.* 34 And he brought them up into his﻿* house and﻿* set a meal before them,* and rejoiced greatly that he had believed in God with his whole household. 
Paul and Silas Receive an Official Apology
35 And when it﻿* was day, the chief magistrates sent the police officers, saying, “Release those men.” 36 And the jailer reported these words to Paul: “The chief magistrates have sent an order﻿* that you should be released. So come out now and﻿* go in peace!” 37 But Paul said to them, “They beat us in public without due process—men who are Roman citizens—and﻿* threw us﻿* into prison, and now they are wanting to release us secretly? Certainly not! Rather let them come themselves and﻿* bring us out!” 38 So the police officers reported these words to the chief magistrates, and they were afraid when they﻿* heard that they were Roman citizens. 39 And they came and﻿* apologized to them, and after they﻿* brought them﻿* out they asked them﻿* to depart from the city. 40 And when they﻿* came out of the prison, they went to Lydia and when they﻿* saw them,* they encouraged the brothers and departed. 
Attacked by a Mob in Thessalonica
17 Now after they﻿* traveled through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews. 2 ⌊And as was his custom⌋, Paul went in to them and on three Sabbath days he discussed with them from the scriptures, 3 explaining and demonstrating that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and saying, “This Jesus whom I am proclaiming to you is the Christ.” 4 And some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, and also a large number of God-fearing Greeks and not a few of the prominent women. 
5 But the Jews were filled with jealousy and, taking along some worthless men from the rabble in the marketplace and forming a mob, threw the city into an uproar. And attacking Jason’s house, they were looking for them to bring them﻿* out to the popular assembly. 6 And when they﻿* did not find them, they dragged Jason and some brothers before the city officials, shouting, “These people who have stirred up trouble throughout the world have come here also, 7 whom Jason has entertained as guests! And these people are all acting contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying there is another king, Jesus!” 8 And they threw the crowd into confusion, and the city officials who heard these things. 9 And after﻿* taking money as security from Jason and the rest, they released them. 
Paul and Silas in Berea
10 Now the brothers sent away both Paul and Silas at once, during the night, to Berea. ⌊They⌋ went into the synagogue of the Jews when they﻿* arrived. 11 Now these were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica. ⌊They⌋ accepted the message with all eagerness, examining the scriptures every day to see if these things were so. 12 Therefore many of them believed, and not a few of the prominent Greek women and men. 13 But when the Jews from Thessalonica found out that the message of God had been proclaimed by Paul in Berea also, they came there too, inciting and stirring up the crowds. 14 So then the brothers sent Paul away at once to go to the sea, and both Silas and Timothy remained there. 15 And those who conducted Paul brought him﻿* as far as Athens, and after﻿* receiving an order for Silas and Timothy that they should come to him as soon as possible, they went away. 
Paul in Athens
16 Now while Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit was provoked within him when he﻿* observed the city was full of idols. 17 So he was discussing in the synagogue with the Jews and the God-fearing Gentiles,* and in the marketplace every day with those who happened to be there. 18 And even some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers were conversing with him, and some were saying, “What does this babbler want to say?” But others said,* “He appears to be a proclaimer of foreign deities,” because he was proclaiming the good news about Jesus and the resurrection. 19 And they took hold of him and﻿* brought him﻿* to the Areopagus, saying, “May we learn what is this new teaching being proclaimed by you? 20 For you are bringing some astonishing things to our ears. Therefore we want to know what ⌊these things mean⌋.” 21 (Now all the Athenians and the foreigners who stayed there used to spend their time in nothing else than telling something or listening to something new.) 
Paul Speaks to the Areopagus
22 So Paul stood there in the middle of the Areopagus and﻿* said, “Men of Athens, I see you are very religious ⌊in every respect⌋. 23 For as I﻿* was passing through and observing carefully your objects of worship, I even found an altar on which was inscribed, ‘To an unknown God.’ Therefore what you worship without knowing it,* this I proclaim to you—24 the God who made the world and all the things in it. This one, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by human hands, 25 nor is he served by human hands as if he﻿* needed anything, because﻿* he himself gives to everyone life and breath and everything. 26 And he made from one man every nation of humanity to live on all the face of the earth, determining their fixed times and the fixed boundaries of their habitation, 27 to search for God, if perhaps indeed they might feel around for him and find him.* And indeed he is not far away from each one of us, 28 for in him we live and move and exist, as even some of ⌊your own⌋ poets have said: ‘For we also are ⌊his⌋ offspring.’ 29 Therefore, because we﻿* are offspring of God, we ought not to think the divine being is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by human skill and thought. 30 Therefore although﻿* God has overlooked the times of ignorance, he now commands all people everywhere to repent, 31 because he has set a day on which he is going to judge the world in righteousness by the man who he has appointed, having provided proof to everyone by﻿* raising him from the dead.” 32 Now when they﻿* heard about the resurrection of the dead, some scoffed, but others said, “We will hear you about this again also.” 33 So Paul went out from the midst of them. 34 But some people﻿* joined him and﻿* believed, among whom also were Dionysius the Areopagite and a woman ⌊named⌋ Damaris and others with them. 
Paul, Silas, and Timothy in Corinth
18 After these things he departed from Athens and﻿* went to Corinth. 2 And he found a certain Jew ⌊named⌋ Aquila, ⌊a native⌋ of Pontus who had arrived recently from Italy ⌊along with⌋ Priscilla his wife, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to depart from Rome, and﻿* he went to them. 3 And because he was practicing the same trade, he stayed with them and worked, for they were tentmakers by trade. 4 And he argued in the synagogue every Sabbath, attempting to persuade﻿* both Jews and Greeks. 
5 Now when both Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul began to be occupied with﻿* the message, solemnly testifying to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus. 6 And when﻿* they resisted and reviled him,* he shook out his﻿* clothes and﻿* said to them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am guiltless! From now on I will go to the Gentiles!” 7 And leaving there, he entered into the house of someone ⌊named⌋ Titius Justus, a worshiper of God whose house was next door to the synagogue. 8 And Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord together with his whole household. And many of the Corinthians, when they﻿* heard about it,* believed and were baptized. 9 And the Lord said to Paul by a vision in the night, “Do not be afraid, but speak and do not keep silent, 10 because I am with you and no one will attack you to harm you, because many people are mine in this city.” 11 So he stayed a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them. 
Paul Accused Before the Proconsul Gallio
12 Now when﻿* Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up with one purpose against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat, 13 saying, “This man is persuading people to worship God contrary to the law!” 14 But when﻿* Paul was about to open his﻿* mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, “If it was some crime or wicked villainy, O Jews, ⌊I would have been justified in accepting⌋ your complaint. 15 But if it is questions concerning a word and names and ⌊your own law⌋, see to it﻿* yourselves! I do not wish to be a judge of these things.” 16 And he drove them away from the judgment seat. 17 So they all seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and﻿* began beating﻿* him﻿* in front of the judgment seat. And none of these things was a concern to Gallio. 
Paul Returns to Antioch in Syria
18 So Paul, after﻿* remaining many days longer, said farewell to the brothers and﻿* sailed away to Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila. He shaved his﻿* head at Cenchrea, because he had taken a vow.19 So they arrived at Ephesus, and those he left behind there, but he himself entered into the synagogue and﻿* discussed with the Jews. 20 And when﻿* they asked him﻿* to stay for a longer time, he did not give his consent, 21 but saying farewell and telling them,* “I will return to you again if﻿* God wills,” he set sail from Ephesus. 
22 And when he﻿* arrived at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church, and﻿* went down to Antioch. 23 And after﻿* spending some time there, he departed, traveling through one place after another in the Galatian region and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples. 
The Early Ministry of Apollos
24 Now a certain Jew ⌊named⌋ Apollos, ⌊a native⌋ Alexandrian, arrived in Ephesus—an eloquent man who was well-versed in the scriptures. 25 This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord, and being enthusiastic in spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately the things about Jesus, although he﻿* knew only the baptism of John. 26 And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when﻿* Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained the way of God to him more accurately. 27 And when﻿* he wanted to cross over to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him﻿* and﻿* wrote to the disciples to welcome him. When he﻿* arrived, ⌊he⌋ assisted greatly those who had believed through grace. 28 For he was vigorously refuting the Jews in public, demonstrating through the scriptures that the Christ was Jesus. 
Paul Finds Disciples of John the Baptist in Ephesus
19 And it happened that while Apollos was in Corinth, Paul traveled through the inland regions and﻿* came to Ephesus and found some disciples. 2 And he said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you﻿* believed?” And they said to him, “But we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit!” 3 And he said, “Into what then were you baptized?” And they said, “Into the baptism of John.” 4 And Paul said, “John baptized with a baptism of repentance, telling the people that they should believe in the one who was to come after him—that is, in Jesus.” 5 And when they﻿* heard this,* they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 6 And when﻿* Paul laid hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them and they began to speak﻿* in tongues and to prophesy. 7 (Now the total number of men was about twelve.) 
8 So he entered into the synagogue and﻿* was speaking boldly for three months, discussing and attempting to convince them﻿* concerning the kingdom of God. 9 But when some became hardened and were disobedient, reviling the Way before the congregation, he departed from them and﻿* took away the disciples, leading discussions every day in the lecture hall of Tyrannus. 10 And this took place for two years, so that all who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks. 
Would-be Exorcists
11 And God was performing ⌊extraordinary⌋ miracles by the hands of Paul, 12 so that even handkerchiefs or work aprons ⌊that had touched his skin⌋ were carried away to those who were sick, and their﻿* diseases left them and the evil spirits came out of them.* 13 But some itinerant Jewish exorcists also attempted to pronounce the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits, saying, “I adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches!” 14 (Now seven sons of a certain Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this.) 15 But the evil spirit answered and﻿* said to them, “Jesus I know, and Paul I am acquainted with, but who are you?” 16 And the man ⌊who had the evil spirit⌋ leaped on them, subdued all of them, and﻿* prevailed against them, so that they ran away from that house naked and wounded. 17 And this became known to all who lived in Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks, and fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was exalted. 18 And many of those who had believed came, confessing and disclosing their practices, 19 and many of those who practiced magic brought together their﻿* books and﻿* burned them﻿* up in the sight of everyone. And they counted up their value and found it was ⌊fifty thousand silver coins⌋. 20 In this way the word of the Lord was growing in power and was prevailing. 
A Major Riot in Ephesus
21 Now when these things were completed, Paul resolved in the Spirit to go to Jerusalem, passing through Macedonia and Achaia, saying, “After I have been there, it is necessary for me to see Rome also.” 22 So after﻿* sending two of those who were assisting him, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, he himself stayed some time in Asia. 
23 Now there happened at that time no little disturbance concerning the Way. 24 For someone ⌊named⌋ Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver replicas of the temple of Artemis, was bringing no little business to the craftsmen. 25 ⌊These⌋ he gathered together, and the workers occupied with such things, and﻿* said, “Men, you know that from this business ⌊we get our prosperity⌋, 26 and you see and hear that not only in Ephesus but in almost all of Asia this man Paul has persuaded and﻿* turned away a large crowd by﻿* saying that the gods made by hands are not gods. 27 So not only is there a danger this line of business of ours will come into disrepute, but also the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be regarded as nothing—and she is about to be brought down even from her grandeur, she whom the whole of Asia and the entire world worship!” 
28 And when they﻿* heard this﻿* and became full of rage, they began to shout,* saying, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” 29 And the city was filled with the tumult, and with one purpose they rushed into the theater, seizing Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians who were traveling companions of Paul. 30 But when﻿* Paul wanted to enter into the popular assembly, the disciples would not let him. 31 And even some of the Asiarchs who were his friends sent word﻿* to him and﻿* were urging him﻿* not to risk himself by going into the theater. 32 So some were shouting one thing﻿* and some another, for the assembly was in confusion, and the majority did not know ⌊why⌋ they had assembled. 33 And some of the crowd advised Alexander, when﻿* the Jews put him forward. But Alexander, motioning with his﻿* hand, was wanting to defend himself to the popular assembly. 34 But when they﻿* recognized that he was a Jew, they were shouting with one voice from all of them for about two hours, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” 35 And when﻿* the city secretary had quieted the crowd, he said, “Ephesian men, for who is there among men who does not know the Ephesian city is honorary temple keeper of the great Artemis and of her﻿* image fallen from heaven? 36 Therefore because﻿* these things are undeniable, it is necessary that you be quiet and do nothing rash! 37 For you have brought these men here who are neither temple robbers nor blasphemers of our goddess. 38 If then Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a complaint against anyone, the court days are observed and there are proconsuls—let them bring charges against one another! 39 But if you desire anything further, it will be settled in the lawful assembly. 40 For indeed we are in danger of being accused of rioting concerning today, since there﻿* is no cause in relation to which we will be able to give an account concerning this disorderly gathering!” 41 And when he﻿* had said these things, he dismissed the assembly. 
Paul Travels Through Macedonia and Greece
20 Now after the turmoil had ceased, Paul summoned﻿* the disciples, and after﻿* encouraging them,* he said farewell and﻿* departed to travel to Macedonia. 2 And after he﻿* had gone through those regions and encouraged them ⌊at length⌋, he came to Greece 3 and stayed﻿* three months. Because﻿* a plot was made against him by the Jews as he﻿* was about to set sail for Syria, he came to a decision to return through Macedonia. 4 And Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea, and Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, and Gaius from Derbe, and Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus from Asia, were accompanying him. 5 And these had gone on ahead and﻿* were waiting for us in Troas. 6 And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread and came to them at Troas within five days, where we stayed seven days. 
Eutychus Falls from a Window
7 And on the first day of the week, when﻿* we had assembled to break bread, Paul began conversing﻿* with them, because he﻿* was going to leave on the next day, and he extended his﻿* message until midnight. 8 Now there were quite a few lamps in the upstairs room where we were gathered. 9 And a certain young man ⌊named⌋ Eutychus who was sitting in the window was sinking into a deep sleep while﻿* Paul was conversing at length. Being overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead. 10 But Paul went down and﻿* threw himself on him, and putting his arms around him,* said, “Do not be distressed, for his life is in him.” 11 So he went up and broke bread,* and when he﻿* had eaten and talked for a long time, until dawn, then he departed. 12 And they led the youth away alive, and ⌊were greatly⌋ comforted. 
The Voyage to Miletus
13 But we went on ahead to the ship and﻿* put out to sea for Assos, intending to take Paul on board there. For having made arrangements in this way, he himself was intending to travel by land. 14 And when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and﻿* went to Mitylene. 15 And we sailed from there on the next day, and﻿* arrived opposite Chios. And on the next day we approached Samos, and on the following day we came to Miletus. 16 For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus so that he would not be having to spend time in Asia. For he was hurrying if it could be possible for him to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. 
Paul’s Farewell to the Ephesian Elders
17 And from Miletus he sent word﻿* to Ephesus and﻿* summoned the elders of the church. 18 And when they came to him, he said to them, “You know from the first day on which I set foot in Asia how I was the whole time with you—19 serving the Lord with all humility and with tears, and with the trials that happened to me through the plots of the Jews—20 how I did not shrink from proclaiming to you anything that would be profitable, and from teaching you in public and from house to house, 21 testifying both to Jews and to Greeks with respect to repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus. 
22 “And now behold, bound by the Spirit I am traveling to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that will happen to me ⌊there⌋, 23 except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in town after town, saying that bonds and persecutions await me. 24 But I consider my﻿* life as worth ⌊nothing⌋ to myself, in order to finish my mission and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God. 
25 “And now behold, I know that all of you, among whom I went about proclaiming the kingdom, will see my face no more. 26 Therefore I testify to you on this very day that I am guiltless of the blood of all of you,* 27 for I did not shrink from proclaiming to you the whole purpose of God. 28 Be on guard for yourselves and for all the flock among which the Holy Spirit has appointed you as overseers, to shepherd the church of God which he obtained through the blood of his own Son. 29 I know that after my departure fierce wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock. 30 And from among you yourselves men will arise, speaking ⌊perversions of the truth⌋ in order to draw away the disciples after them. 31 Therefore be on the alert, remembering that night and day for three years I did not stop warning each one of you﻿* with tears. 
32 “And now I entrust you to God and to the message of his grace, which is able to build you﻿* up and to give you﻿* the inheritance among all those who are sanctified. 33 I have desired no one’s silver or gold or clothing! 34 You yourselves know that these hands served to meet﻿* my needs and the needs of﻿* those who were with me. 35 I have shown you with respect to all things that by﻿* working hard in this way it is necessary to help those who are in need, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus that he himself said, “It is more blessed to give than to receive.” 
36 And when he﻿* had said these things, he fell to his knees and﻿* prayed with them all. 37 And there was considerable weeping by all, and ⌊hugging⌋ Paul, they kissed him, 38 especially distressed at the statement that he had said, that they were going to see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the ship. 
Paul Travels on to Jerusalem
21 And it happened that after we tore ourselves away﻿* from them, we put out to sea, and﻿* running a straight course we came to Cos and on the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara. 2 And finding a ship that was crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard and﻿* put out to sea. 3 And after we﻿* sighted Cyprus and left it behind ⌊on the port side⌋, we sailed to Syria and arrived at Tyre, because the ship was to unload its﻿* cargo there. 4 And we stayed there seven days after we﻿* found the disciples, who kept telling Paul through the Spirit not to set foot in Jerusalem. 5 And it happened that when our days were over, we departed and﻿* went on our way, while﻿* all of them accompanied us, together with their﻿* wives and children, as far as outside the city. And after﻿* falling to our knees on the beach and﻿* praying, 6 we said farewell to one another and embarked in the ship, and they returned to their own homes. 
7 And when﻿* we had completed the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. And after we﻿* greeted the brothers, we stayed one day with them. 8 And on the next day we departed and﻿* came to Caesarea, and entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and﻿* stayed with him. 9 (⌊Now this man had⌋ four virgin daughters who prophesied.) 
10 And while we﻿* were staying there﻿* many days, a certain prophet ⌊named⌋ Agabus came down from Judea. 11 And he came to us and took Paul’s belt. Tying up his own feet and hands, he said, “This is what the Holy Spirit says: ‘In this way the Jews in Jerusalem will tie up the man whose belt this is, and will deliver him﻿* into the hands of the Gentiles.’ ” 12 And when we heard these things, both we and the local residents urged him not to go up to Jerusalem. 13 Then Paul replied, “What are you doing weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be tied up, but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus!” 14 And because﻿* he would not be persuaded, we remained silent, saying, “The will of the Lord be done.” 
15 So after these days we got ready and﻿* went up to Jerusalem. 16 And some of the disciples from Caesarea also traveled together with us, bringing us﻿* to a certain Mnason of Cyprus, a disciple of long standing, with whom we were to be entertained as guests. 
Paul Visits the Leaders of the Jerusalem Church
17 And when﻿* we came to Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us gladly. 18 And on the next day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present. 19 And after﻿* greeting them, he began to relate﻿* ⌊one after the other⌋ the things which God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry. 20 And when﻿* they heard this,* they began to glorify﻿* God. And they said to him, “You see, brother, how many ten thousands there are among the Jews who have believed, and they are all zealous adherents of the law. 21 And they have been informed about you that you are teaching all the Jews who are among the Gentiles the abandonment of Moses, telling them not to circumcise their﻿* children or to live according to our customs. 22 What then ⌊is to be done⌋? Doubtless they will all hear that you have come! 23 Therefore do this that we tell you: ⌊we have⌋ four men who have taken a vow upon themselves. 24 Take these men and﻿* purify yourself along with them and ⌊pay their expenses⌋ so that they can shave their﻿* heads, and everyone will know that the things which they had been informed about you are nothing, but you yourself also agree with observing the law. 25 But concerning the Gentiles who have believed, we have written a letter after﻿* deciding they should avoid food sacrificed to idols and blood and what has been strangled and sexual immorality.” 26 Then Paul took along the men on the next day, and﻿* after he﻿* had purified himself together with them, he entered into the temple courts,* announcing the completion of the days of purification until ⌊the time⌋ the offering would be presented on behalf of each one of them. 
Paul Arrested in the Temple Courts
27 But when the seven days were about to be completed, the Jews from Asia who had seen him in the temple courts﻿* stirred up the whole crowd and laid hands on him, 28 shouting, “Israelite men, help! This is the man who is teaching everyone everywhere against the people and the law and this place! And furthermore he also brought Greeks into the temple, and has defiled this holy place!” 29 (For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him, whom they thought that Paul had brought into the temple.) 30 And the whole city was stirred up, and the people came running together, and they seized Paul and﻿* dragged him outside of the temple courts,* and immediately the doors were shut. 
31 And as they﻿* were seeking to kill him, a report came up to the military tribune of the cohort that all Jerusalem was in confusion. 32 ⌊He⌋ immediately took along soldiers and centurions and﻿* ran down to them. And when﻿* they saw the military tribune and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul. 33 Then the military tribune came up and﻿* arrested him and ordered him﻿* to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what it was that he had done. 34 But some in the crowd were shouting one thing and others another, and because﻿* he was not able to find out the truth on account of the commotion, he gave orders to bring him into the barracks. 35 And when he came to the steps, it happened that he had to be carried by the soldiers on account of the violence of the crowd, 36 for the crowd of people was following them,* shouting, “Away with him!” 
Paul Permitted to Address the Crowd
37 And as he﻿* was about to be brought into the barracks, Paul said to the military tribune, “Is it permitted for me to say something to you?” And he said, “Do you know Greek? 38 Then you are not the Egyptian who before these days raised a revolt and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?” 39 But Paul said, “I am a Jewish man from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no unimportant city. Now I ask you, allow me to speak to the people.” 40 So when﻿* he permitted him,* Paul, standing there on the steps, motioned with his﻿* hand to the people. And when there﻿* was a great silence, he addressed them﻿* in the Aramaic language, saying, 
22 “Men—brothers and fathers—listen to my defense to you now!” 2 And when they﻿* heard that he was addressing them in the Aramaic language, ⌊they became even more silent⌋. And he said, 3 “I am a Jewish man born in Tarsus in Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, educated according to the exactness of the law received from our fathers, being zealous for God, just as all of you are today. 4 ⌊I⌋ persecuted this Way to the death, tying up and delivering to prison both men and women, 5 as indeed the high priest and the whole council of elders can testify about me, from whom also I received letters to the brothers in Damascus, and﻿* was traveling there﻿* to lead away those who were there also tied up to Jerusalem so that they could be punished. 
Paul Tells of His Conversion on the Damascus Road
6 “And it happened that as﻿* I was traveling and approaching Damascus around noon, suddenly a very bright light from heaven flashed around me, 7 and I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’ 8 And I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me, ‘I am Jesus the Nazarene whom you are persecuting.’ 9 (Now those who were with me saw the light but did not hear the voice of the one who was speaking to me.) 10 So I said, ‘What should I do, Lord?’ And the Lord said to me, ‘Get up and﻿* proceed to Damascus, and there it will be told to you about all the things that have been appointed for you to do.’ 11 And as I could not see as a result of the brightness of that light, I arrived in Damascus led by the hand of those who were with me. 12 And a certain Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well spoken of by all the Jews who live there, 13 came to me and stood by me﻿* and﻿* said to me, ‘Brother Saul, regain your sight!’ And at that same time I looked up at him and saw him.* 14 And he said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One and to hear a voice from his mouth, 15 because you will be a witness for him to all people of what you have seen and heard. 16 And now why are you delaying? Get up, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on his name!’ 
17 “And it happened that when﻿* I returned to Jerusalem and I was praying in the temple courts,* I was in a trance, 18 and saw him saying to me, ‘Hurry and depart ⌊quickly⌋ from Jerusalem, because they will not accept your testimony about me.’ 19 And I said, ‘Lord, they themselves know that from synagogue to synagogue I was imprisoning and beating those who believed in you. 20 And when the blood of your witness Stephen was being shed, I myself also was standing near and was approving, and was guarding the cloaks of those who were killing him.’ 21 And he said to me, ‘Go, because I will send you far away to the Gentiles!’ ” 
Paul Questioned by the Military Tribune
22 Now they were listening to him until this word, and they raised their voices, saying, “Away with such a man from the earth! For it is not fitting for him to live!” 23 And while﻿* they were screaming and throwing off their﻿* cloaks and throwing dust into the air, 24 the military tribune ordered him to be brought into the barracks, saying he was to be examined with a lash so that he could find out for what reason they were crying out against him in this way. 25 But when they had stretched him out for the lash, Paul said to the centurion standing there, “Is it permitted for you to flog a man who is a Roman citizen and uncondemned?” 26 And when﻿* the centurion heard this,* he went to the military tribune and﻿* reported it,* saying, “What are you about to do? For this man is a Roman citizen!” 27 So the military tribune came and﻿* said to him, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?” And he said, “Yes.” 28 And the military tribune replied, “I acquired this citizenship for a large sum of money.” And Paul said, “But I indeed was born a citizen.* 29 Then immediately those who were about to examine him kept away from him, and the military tribune also was afraid when he﻿* realized that he was a Roman citizen and that ⌊he had tied him up⌋. 30 But on the next day, because he﻿* wanted to know the true reason why he was being accused by the Jews, he released him and ordered the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin to assemble, and he brought down Paul and﻿* had him﻿* stand before them. 
Paul Before the Sanhedrin
23 And looking intently at the Sanhedrin, Paul said, “Men and brothers, I have lived my life in all good conscience before God to this day.” 2 So the high priest Ananias ordered those standing near him to strike his mouth. 3 Then Paul said to him, “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall! And are you sitting there judging me according to the law, and acting contrary to the law do you order me to be struck?” 4 And those who stood nearby said, “Are you reviling the high priest of God?” 5 And Paul said, “I did not know, brothers, that he was high priest. For it is written, ‘You must not speak evil of a ruler of your people.’ ” 
6 Now when﻿* Paul realized that one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he shouted out in the Sanhedrin, “Men and brothers! I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees! I am being judged concerning the hope and the resurrection of the dead!” 7 And when﻿* he said this, a dispute developed between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided. 8 (For the Sadducees say there is no resurrection or angel or spirit, but the Pharisees acknowledge them all.) 9 And there was loud shouting, and some of the scribes from the party of the Pharisees stood up and﻿* contended sharply, saying, “We find nothing wrong with this man! But what if a spirit or an angel has spoken to him?” 10 And when﻿* the dispute became severe, the military tribune, fearing lest Paul be torn apart by them, ordered the detachment to go down, take him away from their midst, and bring him﻿* into the barracks. 11 And the next night the Lord stood by him and﻿* said, “Have courage, for as you have testified about me in Jerusalem, so you must also testify in Rome.” 
A Conspiracy to Kill Paul
12 And when it﻿* was day, the Jews made a conspiracy and﻿* bound themselves under a curse, saying they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul. 13 Now there were more than forty who had made this conspiracy, 14 who went to the chief priests and the elders and﻿* said, “We have bound ourselves under a curse to partake of nothing until we have killed Paul. 15 Therefore, now you along with the Sanhedrin explain to the military tribune that he should bring him down to you, as if you were going to determine more accurately the things concerning him. And we are ready to do away with him before he comes near.” 
16 But when﻿* the son of Paul’s sister heard about the ambush, he came and entered into the barracks and﻿* reported it﻿* to Paul. 17 So Paul called one of the centurions and﻿* said, “Bring this young man to the military tribune, because he has something to report to him.” 18 So he took him and﻿* brought him﻿* to the military tribune and said, “The prisoner Paul called me and﻿* asked me﻿* to bring this young man to you because he﻿* has something to tell you.” 19 And the military tribune, taking hold of his hand and withdrawing privately, asked, “What is it that you have to report to me?” 20 And he said, “The Jews have agreed to ask you that you bring Paul down to the Sanhedrin tomorrow, as if they were going to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him. 21 You therefore do not be persuaded by them, because more than forty men of ⌊their number⌋ are lying in wait for him, who have bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have done away with him. And now they are ready, waiting for ⌊you to agree⌋.” 22 So the military tribune sent the young man away, directing him,* “Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me.” 
23 And he summoned two of the centurions and﻿* said, “Make ready from the third hour of the night two hundred soldiers and seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen, in order that they may proceed as far as Caesarea. 24 And provide mounts so that they can put Paul on them and﻿* bring him﻿* safely to Felix the governor.” 25 ⌊He wrote⌋ a letter that had this form: 
26 Claudius Lysias. 
To his excellency Governor Felix. 
Greetings! 
27 This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be killed by them when I﻿* came upon them﻿* with the detachment and﻿* rescued him,* because I﻿* learned that he was a Roman citizen. 28 And because I﻿* wanted to know the charge for which they were accusing him, I brought him﻿* down to their Sanhedrin. 29 I found ⌊he⌋ was accused concerning controversial questions of their law, but having no charge deserving death or imprisonment. 30 And when it﻿* was made known to me there would be a plot against the man, I sent him﻿* to you immediately, also ordering his﻿* accusers to speak against him before you. 
31 Therefore the soldiers, in accordance with ⌊their orders⌋, took Paul and﻿* brought him﻿* to Antipatris during the night. 32 And on the next day they let the horsemen go on with him, and﻿* they returned to the barracks. 33 ⌊The horsemen⌋, when they﻿* came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, also presented Paul to him. 34 So after﻿* reading the letter﻿* and asking what province he was from, and learning that he was from Cilicia, 35 he said, “I will give you a hearing whenever your accusers arrive also,” giving orders for him to be guarded in the praetorium of Herod. 
Paul Before Felix at Caesarea Maritima
24 And after five days the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and an attorney, a certain Tertullus, all of whom brought charges against Paul to the governor. 2 And when﻿* he had been summoned, Tertullus began to accuse him,* saying, “We have experienced﻿* much peace through you, and reforms are taking place in this nation through your foresight. 3 Both in every way and everywhere we acknowledge this,* most excellent Felix, with all gratitude. 4 But so that I may not impose on you for longer, I implore you to hear us briefly with your customary graciousness. 5 For we have found﻿* this man to be a public menace and one who causes riots among all the Jews throughout the Roman Empire and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, 6 who even attempted to desecrate the temple, and we arrested ⌊him﻿⌋. 8 When﻿* you yourself examine him﻿* you will be able to find out from ⌊him⌋ about all these things of which we are accusing him.” 9 And the Jews also joined in the attack, asserting these things were so. 
10 And when﻿* the governor gestured for him to speak, Paul replied, “Because I﻿* know you have been a judge over this nation for many years, I defend myself cheerfully with respect to the things concerning myself. 11 You can ascertain that ⌊it has not been more than⌋ twelve days ⌊since⌋ I went up to Jerusalem to worship. 12 And neither did they find me arguing with anyone or making a crowd develop in the temple courts﻿* nor in the synagogues nor throughout the city. 13 Nor can they prove the things﻿* to you concerning which they are now accusing me. 14 But I do confess this to you, that according to the Way (which they call a sect), so I worship the God of our fathers, believing all things that are in accordance with the law and that are written in the prophets, 15 having a hope in God which these men also themselves await: that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous. 16 ⌊For this reason⌋ also I myself ⌊always⌋ do my best to have a clear conscience toward God and people. 17 So after many years, I came to practice charitable giving and offerings to my people, 18 in which they found me purified in the temple courts,* not with a crowd or with a disturbance. 19 But there are some Jews from Asia who ought to be present before you and bring charges against me,* if they have anything against me, 20 or these men themselves should say what crime they found when﻿* I stood before the Sanhedrin, 21 other than concerning this one declaration that I shouted while﻿* standing there before them: ‘I am being judged before you today concerning the resurrection of the dead!’ ” 
Paul Held Awaiting Trial
22 But Felix, because he﻿* understood the facts concerning the Way more accurately, put them off, saying, “When Lysias the military tribune comes down, I will decide ⌊your case⌋.” 23 He ordered﻿* the centurion for him to be guarded and to have some freedom, and in no way to prevent any of his own people from serving him. 
24 And after some days, when﻿* Felix arrived with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, he sent for Paul and listened to him concerning faith in Christ Jesus. 25 And while﻿* he was discussing about righteousness and self control and the judgment that is to come, Felix became afraid and﻿* replied, “Go away for the present, and when I﻿* have an opportunity, I will summon you.” 26 At the same time he was also hoping that money would be given to him by Paul. For this reason also he sent for him as often as possible and﻿* talked with him. 27 And when﻿* two years had passed, Felix received as successor Porcius Festus. And because he﻿* wanted to do a favor for the Jews, Felix left Paul behind ⌊as a prisoner⌋. 
Paul Appeals to Caesar
25 Now when﻿* Festus set foot in the province, after three days he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. 2 And the chief priests and the most prominent men of the Jews brought charges against Paul to him, and were urging him, 3 asking for a favor against him, that he summon him to Jerusalem, because they﻿* were preparing an ambush to do away with him along the way. 4 Then Festus replied that Paul was being kept at Caesarea, and he himself was about to go there﻿* in a short time. 5 So he said, “Let those among you who are prominent go down with me,* and﻿* if there is any wrong in the man, let them bring charges against him.” 
6 And after he﻿* had stayed among them not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea. On the next day he sat down on the judgment seat and﻿* gave orders for Paul to be brought. 7 And when﻿* he arrived, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many and serious charges that they were not able to prove, 8 while﻿* Paul said in his defense, “Neither against the law of the Jews nor against the temple nor against Caesar have I sinned with reference to anything!” 9 But Festus, because he﻿* wanted to do a favor for the Jews, answered and﻿* said to Paul, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem to be tried before me there concerning these things?” 10 But Paul said, “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where it is necessary for me to be judged. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well. 11 If then I am doing wrong and have done anything deserving death, I am not trying to avoid﻿* dying. But if there is nothing true of the things which these people are accusing me, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar!” 12 Then Festus, after﻿* discussing this﻿* with his﻿* council, replied, “You have appealed to Caesar—to Caesar you will go!” 
Festus Asks King Agrippa for Advice
13 Now after﻿* some days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea to welcome Festus. 14 And while they were staying there many days, Festus laid out the case against Paul to the king, saying, “There is a certain man left behind by Felix as a prisoner, 15 concerning whom when﻿* I was in Jerusalem the chief priests and the elders of the Jews presented evidence, asking for a sentence of condemnation against him. 16 To ⌊them⌋ I replied that it was not the custom of the Romans to give up any man before the one who had been accused met his﻿* accusers face to face and received an opportunity for a defense concerning the accusation. 17 Therefore, when﻿* they had assembled here, I made﻿* no delay; on the next day I sat down on the judgment seat and﻿* gave orders for the man to be brought. 18 When they﻿* stood up, his﻿* accusers began bringing﻿* no charge concerning ⌊him⌋ of the evil deeds that I was suspecting, 19 but they had some issues with him concerning their own religion, and concerning a certain Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul claimed to be alive. 20 And because﻿* I was at a loss with regard to the investigation concerning these things, I asked if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and to be judged there concerning these things. 21 But when﻿* Paul appealed that he be kept under guard for the decision of His Majesty the Emperor, I gave orders for him to be kept under guard until I could send him to Caesar.” 22 So Agrippa said to Festus, “I want to hear the man myself also.” “Tomorrow,” he said, “you will hear him.” 
23 So on the next day, Agrippa and Bernice came with great pageantry and entered into the audience hall, along with military tribunes and the most prominent men of the city. And when﻿* Festus gave the order, Paul was brought in. 24 And Festus said, “King Agrippa and all who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole population of the Jews appealed to me, both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he must not live any longer. 25 But I understood that he had done nothing deserving death himself, and when﻿* this man appealed to His Majesty the Emperor, I decided to send him.* 26 I do not have anything definite to write to my﻿* lord about ⌊him⌋. Therefore I have brought him before you all﻿*—and especially before you, King Agrippa—so that after﻿* this preliminary hearing has taken place, I may have something to write. 27 For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner and not to indicate the charges against him.” 
Paul Makes His Defense Before King Agrippa
26 So Agrippa said to Paul, “It is permitted for you to speak for yourself.” Then Paul extended his﻿* hand and﻿* began to defend himself:* 
2 “Concerning all the things of which I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa, I consider myself fortunate that before you I am about to defend myself today, 3 because﻿* you are especially acquainted with both all the customs and controversial questions with respect to the Jews. Therefore I beg you﻿* to listen to me with patience. 
4 “Now all the Jews know my manner of life from my youth, that had taken place from the beginning among my own people and in Jerusalem, 5 having known me for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that in accordance with the strictest party of our religion I lived as a Pharisee. 6 And now I stand here on trial on the basis of hope in the promise made by God to our fathers, 7 to which our twelve tribes hope to attain as they earnestly serve him﻿* night and day. Concerning this hope I am being accused by the Jews, O king! 8 Why is it thought incredible by you people﻿* that God raises the dead? 9 Indeed, I myself thought it was necessary to do many things opposed to the name of Jesus the Nazarene, 10 which I also did in Jerusalem, and not only did I lock up many of the saints in prison, having received authority from the chief priests, but also when﻿* they were being executed, I cast my vote against them.* 11 And throughout all the synagogues I punished them often and﻿* tried to force﻿* them﻿* to blaspheme, and because I﻿* was enraged at them beyond measure, I was pursuing them﻿* even as far as to foreign cities. 12 In ⌊this activity⌋ I was traveling to Damascus with the authority and full power of the chief priests. 13 In the middle of the day along the road, O king, I saw a light from heaven, more than the brightness of the sun, shining around me and those who were traveling with me. 14 And when﻿* we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Aramaic language, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads!’ 15 So I said, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus whom you are persecuting. 16 But get up and stand on your feet, because for this reason I have appeared to you, to appoint you a servant and witness both to the things in which you saw me and to the things in which I will appear to you, 17 rescuing you from the people and from the Gentiles to whom I am sending you, 18 to open their eyes so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a share among those who are sanctified by faith in me.’ 
19 “Therefore, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, 20 but to those in Damascus first, and in Jerusalem and all the region of Judea and to the Gentiles, I proclaimed that they should repent and turn to God, doing deeds worthy of repentance. 21 On account of these things the Jews seized me in the temple courts﻿* and﻿* were attempting to kill me.* 22 Therefore I have experienced help from God until this day, and﻿* I stand here testifying to both small and great, saying nothing except what both the prophets and Moses have said were going to happen, 23 that the Christ was to suffer and that as the first of the resurrection from the dead, he was going to proclaim light both to the people and to the Gentiles.” 
24 And as﻿* he was saying these things in his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, “You are out of your mind, Paul! Your﻿* great learning ⌊is driving⌋ you ⌊insane⌋!” 25 But Paul said, “I am not out of my mind, most excellent Festus, but am speaking words of truth and rationality. 26 For the king knows about these things, to whom also I am speaking freely, for I am not convinced that these things in any way have escaped his notice, because this ⌊was⌋ not ⌊done⌋ in a corner. 27 Do you believe the prophets, King Agrippa? I know that you believe.” 28 But Agrippa said to Paul, “In a short time are you persuading me to become a Christian?” 29 And Paul replied, “I pray to God, whether in a short time or in a long time, not only you but also all those who are listening to me today may become such people as I also am, except for these bonds!” 
30 Both the king and the governor got up, and Bernice and those who were sitting with them. 31 And as they﻿* were going out, they were talking to one another, saying, “This man is not doing anything deserving death or imprisonment.” 32 And Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.” 
Paul and His Associates Sail for Rome
27 And when it was decided that we would sail away to Italy, they handed over Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion ⌊named⌋ Julius of the Augustan Cohort. 2 And we went aboard a ship from Adramyttium that was about to sail to the places along the coast﻿* of Asia and﻿* put out to sea. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, was with us. 3 And on the next day, we put in at Sidon. And Julius, treating Paul kindly, allowed him﻿* to go to his﻿* friends ⌊to be cared for⌋. 4 And from there we put out to sea and﻿* sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were against us.* 5 And after we﻿* had sailed across the open sea along Cilicia and Pamphylia, we put in at Myra in Lycia. 6 And there the centurion found an Alexandrian ship sailing for Italy and﻿* put us ⌊on board⌋ it. 7 And sailing slowly, in many days and with difficulty we came﻿* to Cnidus. Because﻿* the wind did not permit us to go further, we sailed under the lee of Crete off Salmone. 8 And sailing along its coast with difficulty, we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near which was the town of Lasea. 
9 And because﻿* considerable time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous because even the Fast was already over, Paul strongly recommended, 10 saying to them, “Men, I perceive that the voyage is going ⌊to end⌋ with disaster and great loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives!” 11 But the centurion was convinced even more by the shipmaster and the shipowner than by what was said by Paul. 12 And because﻿* the harbor was unsuitable for spending the winter in, the majority decided on a plan to put out to sea from there, if somehow they could arrive at Phoenix, a harbor of Crete facing toward the southwest and toward the northwest, to spend the winter there.* 
A Violent Storm at Sea
13 And when﻿* a southwest wind began to blow gently, because they﻿* thought they could accomplish their purpose, they weighed anchor and﻿* sailed close along Crete. 14 But not long afterward a wind like a hurricane, called the northeaster, rushed down from it. 15 And when﻿* the ship was caught and was not able to head into the wind, we gave way and﻿* were driven along. 16 And running under the lee of a certain small island called Cauda, we were able with difficulty to get the ship’s boat under control. 17 After﻿* hoisting ⌊it up⌋, they made use of supports to undergird the ship. And because they﻿* were afraid lest they run aground on the Syrtis, they lowered the sea anchor and﻿* thus were driven along. 18 And because﻿* we were violently battered by the storm, on the next day ⌊they began⌋ jettisoning the cargo,* 19 and on the third day they threw overboard the gear of the ship with their own hands. 20 But when﻿* neither sun nor stars appeared for many days, and with not a little bad weather confronting us,* finally all hope was abandoned that we would be saved. 
21 And because﻿* many were experiencing lack of appetite, at that time Paul stood up in their midst and﻿* said, “Men, you ought to have followed my advice not to put out to sea from Crete, and thus avoided this damage and loss! 22 And now I urge you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of life from among you, but only of the ship. 23 For this night an angel of the God whose I am and whom I serve came to me, 24 saying, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul! It is necessary for you to stand before Caesar, and behold, God has graciously granted you all who are sailing with you.’ 25 Therefore keep up your courage, men, for I believe God that it will be like this—according to ⌊the⌋ way it was told to me. 26 But it is necessary that we run aground on some island.” 
27 And when the fourteenth night had come, as﻿* we were being driven in the Adriatic Sea about the middle of the night, the sailors suspected ⌊they were approaching some land⌋. 28 And taking soundings, they found twenty fathoms. So going on a little further and taking soundings again, they found fifteen fathoms. 29 And because they﻿* were afraid lest somewhere we run aground against rough places, they threw down four anchors from the stern and﻿* prayed for day to come. 30 And when﻿* the sailors were seeking to escape from the ship and were lowering the ship’s boat into the sea, pretending as if they were going to lay out anchors from the bow, 31 Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, “Unless these men remain with the ship, you cannot be saved!” 32 Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the ship’s boat and let it fall away. 
33 And until the day was about to come, Paul was urging them all to take some food, saying, “Today is the fourteenth day you have waited anxiously, and﻿* you have continued without eating, having taken nothing. 34 Therefore I urge you to take some food, for this is necessary for your preservation. For not a hair from your head will be lost.” 35 And after he﻿* said these things and took bread, he gave thanks to God in front of them all, and after﻿* breaking it,* he began to eat. 36 So they all were﻿* encouraged and partook of food themselves. 37 (Now we were in all two hundred seventy six persons on the ship.) 38 And when they﻿* had eaten their fill of food, they lightened the ship by﻿* throwing the wheat into the sea. 
The Shipwreck
39 Now when day came, they did not recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay having a beach, onto which they decided to run the ship ashore if they could. 40 And slipping the anchors, they left them﻿* in the sea, at the same time loosening the ropes of the steering oars. And hoisting the foresail to the wind that was blowing, they held course for the beach. 41 But falling into a place of crosscurrents, they ran the ship aground. And the bow stuck fast and﻿* stayed immovable, but the stern was being broken up by the violence. 42 Now the plan of the soldiers was that they would kill the prisoners lest any escape by﻿* swimming away, 43 but the centurion, because he﻿* wanted to save Paul, prevented them ⌊from doing what they intended⌋, and gave orders that those who were able to swim should jump in first to get to the land, 44 and then the rest, some of whom floated﻿* on planks and some of whom on anything that was from the ship. And in this way all were brought safely to the land. 
Paul on Malta
28 And after we﻿* were brought safely through, then we found out that the island was called Malta. 2 And the local inhabitants showed ⌊extraordinary⌋ kindness to us, for they lit a fire and﻿* welcomed us all, because of the rain that had begun and because of the cold. 3 And when﻿* Paul had gathered a large number of sticks and was placing them﻿* on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and﻿* fastened itself on his hand. 4 And when the local people saw the creature hanging from his hand, they began saying﻿* to one another, “Doubtless this man is a murderer whom, although he﻿* was rescued from the sea, Justice﻿* has not permitted to live!” 5 He, in turn, shook off the creature into the fire and﻿* suffered no harm. 6 But they were expecting that he was going to swell up or suddenly to fall down dead. So after﻿* they had waited for a long time and saw nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and﻿* began saying﻿* that he was a god. 
7 Now in the regions around that place were fields belonging to the chief official of the island, ⌊named⌋ Publius, who welcomed us and﻿* entertained us﻿* hospitably for three days. 8 And it happened that the father of Publius was lying down, afflicted with fever and dysentery. Paul went﻿* to ⌊him⌋ and after﻿* praying, he placed his﻿* hands on him and﻿* healed him. 9 And after﻿* this had taken place, the rest of those on the island who had diseases were coming and being healed also. 10 They also honored us with many honors, and when we﻿* were putting out to sea, they gave us﻿* the things ⌊we needed⌋. 
Paul Arrives in Rome at Last
11 Now after three months we put out to sea in a ship that had wintered at the island, an Alexandrian one ⌊with the twin gods Castor and Pollux as its insignia⌋. 12 And putting in at Syracuse, we stayed there three days. 13 From there we got underway and﻿* arrived at Rhegium, and after one day a south wind came up and﻿* on the second day we came to Puteoli, 14 where we found brothers, and﻿* were implored to stay with them seven days. And in this way we came to Rome. 15 And from there the brothers, when they﻿* heard the news about us, came to meet us as far as the Forum of Appius and Three Taverns. When he﻿* saw them, Paul gave thanks to God and﻿* took courage. 16 And when we entered into Rome, Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who was guarding him. 
Paul and the Jewish Community in Rome
17 Now it happened that after three days, he called together those who were the most prominent of the Jews. And when﻿* they had assembled, he said to them, “Men and brothers, although﻿* I had done nothing against our﻿* people or the customs of our fathers, from Jerusalem I was delivered as a prisoner into the hands of the Romans, 18 who, when they﻿* had examined me, were wanting to release me,* because there was no basis for an accusation worthy of death with me. 19 But because﻿* the Jews objected, I was forced to appeal to Caesar (not as if I﻿* had any charge to bring against my own people). 20 Therefore for this reason I have requested to see you and to speak with you,* for because of the hope of Israel I am wearing this chain!” 21 And they said to him, “We have received no letters about you from Judea, nor has any of the brothers come and﻿* reported or spoken anything evil about you. 22 But we would like to hear from you what you think, for concerning this sect it is known to us that it is spoken against everywhere.” 
23 And when they﻿* had set a day with him, many more came to him at his lodging place, to whom he was explaining from early in the morning until evening, testifying about the kingdom of God and attempting to convince﻿* them about Jesus from both the law of Moses and the prophets. 24 And some were convinced by﻿* what was said, but others refused to believe. 25 So being in disagreement with one another, they began to leave after﻿* Paul made one statement: “The Holy Spirit spoke rightly through the prophet Isaiah to your fathers, 26 saying, 
‘Go to this people and say, 
“⌊You will keep on hearing⌋ and will never understand, 
and ⌊you will keep on seeing⌋ and will never perceive. 
27 For the heart of this people has become dull, 
and with their﻿* ears they hear with difficulty, 
and they have shut their eyes, 
lest they see with their﻿* eyes, 
and hear with their﻿* ears, 
and understand with their﻿* heart, 
and turn, and I would heal them.” ’ 
28 Therefore let it be known to you that this salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles. They also will listen!” 
30 So he stayed two whole years in his own rented house, and welcomed all who came to him, 31 proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hindrance.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO THE ROMANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, 2 which he promised previously through his prophets in the holy scriptures, 3 concerning his Son, who was born ⌊a descendant⌋ of David according to the flesh, 4 who was declared Son of God in power according to ⌊the Holy Spirit⌋ by the resurrection from the dead of Jesus Christ our Lord, 5 through whom we have received grace and apostleship for the obedience of faith among all the Gentiles on behalf of his name, 6 among whom you also are the called of Jesus Christ. 7 To all those in Rome who are loved by God, called to be saints. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Paul Wants to Visit Rome
8 First, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is being proclaimed in the whole world. 9 For God, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, is my witness, how constantly I make mention of you, 10 always asking in my prayers if somehow now at last I may succeed to come to you in the will of God. 11 For I desire to see you, in order that I may impart some spiritual gift to you, in order to strengthen you, 12 that is, to be encouraged together with you through ⌊our mutual faith⌋, both yours and mine. 13 Now I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, that often I intended to come to you, and was prevented until now, in order that I might have some fruit among you also, just as also among the rest of the Gentiles. 14 I am under obligation both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish. 15 Thus ⌊I am eager⌋ to proclaim the gospel also to you who are in Rome. 
The Gospel’s Power for Salvation
16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek. 17 For the righteousness of God is revealed in it from faith to faith, just as it is written, “But the one who is righteous by faith will live.” 
God’s Wrath Revealed Against Sinful Humanity
18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all impiety and unrighteousness of people, who suppress the truth in unrighteousness, 19 because what can be known about God is evident among them, for God made it clear to them. 20 For from the creation of the world, his invisible attributes, both his eternal power and deity, are discerned clearly, being understood in the things created, so that they are without excuse. 21 For although they knew God, they did not honor him as God or give thanks, but they became futile in their reasoning, and their senseless hearts were darkened. 22 Claiming to be wise, they became fools, 23 and exchanged the glory of the immortal God with the likeness of an image of mortal human beings and birds and quadrupeds and reptiles. 
24 Therefore God gave them over in the desires of their hearts to immorality, that their bodies would be dishonored among themselves, 25 who exchanged the truth of God with a lie, and worshiped and served the creation rather than the Creator, who is blessed for eternity. Amen. 
God Hands Sinful Humanity over to Depravity
26 Because of this, God gave them over to degrading passions, for their females exchanged the natural relations for those contrary to nature, 27 and likewise also the males, abandoning the natural relations with the female, were inflamed in their desire toward one another, males with males committing the shameless deed, and receiving in themselves the penalty that was necessary for their error. 28 And just as they did not see fit ⌊to recognize God⌋, God gave them over to a debased mind, to do the things that are not proper, 29 being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greediness, malice, full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malevolence. They are gossipers, 30 slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boasters, contrivers of evil, disobedient to parents, 31 senseless, faithless, unfeeling, unmerciful, 32 who, although they﻿* know the requirements of God, that those who do such things are worthy of death, not only do they do the same things, but also they approve of those who do them. 
The Righteous and Impartial Judgment of God
2 Therefore you are without excuse, O man, every one of you who passes judgment. For in that which you pass judgment on someone else, you condemn yourself, for you who are passing judgment are doing the same things. 2 Now we know that the judgment of God is according to truth against those who do such things. 3 But do you think this, O man who passes judgment on those who do such things, and who does the same things, that you will escape the judgment of God? 4 Or do you despise the wealth of his kindness and forbearance and patience, not knowing that the kindness of God leads you to repentance? 5 But because of your stubbornness and unrepentant heart, you are storing up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, 6 who will reward each one according to his works: 7 to those who, by perseverance in good work, seek glory and honor and immortality, eternal life, 8 but to those who act from selfish ambition and who disobey the truth, but who obey unrighteousness, wrath and anger. 9 There will be affliction and distress for every ⌊human being⌋ who does evil, of the Jew first and of the Greek, 10 but glory and honor and peace to everyone who does good, to the Jew first and to the Greek. 11 For there is no partiality with God. 
12 For as many as have sinned without law will also perish without law, and as many as have sinned under the law will be judged by the law. 13 For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous in the sight of God, but the doers of the law will be declared righteous. 14 For whenever the Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature the things of the law, these, although they﻿* do not have the law, are a law to themselves, 15 who show the work of the law written on their hearts, their conscience bearing witness and their thoughts one after another accusing or even defending them 16 on the day when God judges the secret things of people, according to my gospel, through Christ Jesus. 
Jews also Condemned by the Law
17 But if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law and boast in God 18 and know his will and approve the things that are superior, because you﻿* are instructed by the law, 19 and are confident that you yourself are a guide of the blind, a light of those in darkness, 20 an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of the immature, having the embodiment of knowledge and of the truth in the law. 21 Therefore, the one who teaches someone else, do you not teach yourself? The one who preaches not to steal, do you steal? 22 The one who says not to commit adultery, do you commit adultery? The one who abhors idols, do you rob temples? 23 Who boast in the law, by the transgression of the law you dishonor God! 24 For just as it is written, “The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.” 
25 For circumcision is of value if you do the law, but if you should be a transgressor of the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision. 26 Therefore, if the uncircumcised person follows the requirements of the law, will not his uncircumcision be credited for circumcision? 27 And the uncircumcised person by nature who carries out the law will judge you who, though provided with ⌊the precise written code⌋ and circumcision are a transgressor of the law. 28 For the Jew is not ⌊one outwardly⌋, nor is circumcision ⌊outwardly⌋, in the flesh. 29 But the Jew ⌊is one inwardly⌋, and circumcision is of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the letter, whose praise is not from people but from God. 
Jews Still Have an Advantage
3 Therefore, what is the advantage of the Jew, or what is the use of circumcision? 2 Much in every way. For first, that they were entrusted with the oracles of God. 3 ⌊What is the result⌋ if some refused to believe? Their unbelief will not nullify the faithfulness of God, will it? 4 May it never be! But let God be true but every human being a liar, just as it is written, 
“In order that you may be justified in your words, 
and may prevail when you are﻿* judged.” 
5 But if our unrighteousness demonstrates the righteousness of God, what shall we say? God, who inflicts wrath, is not unjust, is he? (I am speaking according to a human perspective.) 6 May it never be! For otherwise, how will God judge the world? 7 But if by my lying, the truth of God abounded to his glory, why am I also still condemned as a sinner? 8 And why not (as we are slandered, and as some affirm that we say), “Let us do evil, in order that good may come of it? Their condemnation is just! 
The Entire World Guilty of Sin
9 What then? Do we have an advantage? Not at all. For we have already charged both Jews and Greeks are all under sin, 10 just as it is written, 
“There is no one righteous, not even one; 
11 there is no one who understands; 
there is no one who seeks God. 
12 All have turned aside together; they have become worthless; 
There is no one who practices kindness; 
there is not even one. 
13 Their throat is an opened grave; 
they deceive with their tongues; 
the venom of asps is under their lips, 
14 whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. 
15 Their feet are swift to shed blood; 
16 destruction and distress are in their paths, 
17 and they have not known the way of peace. 
18 The fear of God is not before their eyes.” 
19 Now we know that whatever the law says, it speaks to those under the law, in order that every mouth may be closed and the whole world may become accountable to God. 20 For by the works of the law ⌊no person will be declared righteous⌋ before him, for through the law comes knowledge of sin. 
Righteousness through Faith Revealed
21 But now, apart from the law, the righteousness of God has been revealed, being testified about by the law and the prophets—22 that is, the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe. For there is no distinction, 23 for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, 24 being justified as a gift by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, 25 whom God made publicly available as the mercy seat through faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his righteousness, because of the passing over of previously committed sins, 26 in the forbearance of God, for the demonstration of his righteousness in the present time, so that he should be just and the one who justifies the person by faith in Jesus. 
27 Therefore, where is boasting? It has been excluded. By what kind of law? Of works? No, but by a law of faith. 28 For we consider a person to be justified by faith apart from the works of the law. 29 Or is God the God of the Jews only? Is he not also the God of the Gentiles? Yes, also of the Gentiles, 30 since God is one, who will justify ⌊those who are circumcised⌋ by faith and ⌊those who are uncircumcised⌋ through faith. 31 Therefore, do we nullify the law through faith? May it never be! But we uphold the law. 
Abraham’s Faith Counted as Righteousness
4 What then shall we say that Abraham, our ancestor according to the flesh, has found? 2 For if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not before God. 3 For what does the scripture say? “And Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him for righteousness.” 4 Now to the one who works, his pay is not credited according to grace, but according to his due. 5 But to the one who does not work, but who believes in the one who justifies the ungodly, his faith is credited for righteousness, 6 just as David also speaks about the blessing of the person to whom God credits righteousness apart from works: 
7 “Blessed are they whose lawless deeds have been forgiven, 
and whose sins are covered over. 
8 Blessed is the person against whom the Lord will never count sin.” 
9 Therefore, is this blessing for ⌊those who are circumcised⌋, or also for ⌊those who are uncircumcised⌋? For we say, “Faith was credited to Abraham for righteousness.” 10 How then was it credited? While he﻿* was ⌊circumcised⌋ or ⌊uncircumcised⌋? Not ⌊while circumcised⌋ but ⌊while uncircumcised⌋! 11 And he received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness by faith which he had ⌊while uncircumcised⌋, so that he could be the father of all who believe ⌊although they are uncircumcised⌋, so that righteousness could be credited to them, 12 and the father ⌊of those who are circumcised⌋ to those who are not only from the circumcision, but who also follow in the footsteps of the faith of our father Abraham ⌊which he had while uncircumcised⌋. 
The Promise to Abraham Secured through Faith
13 For the promise to Abraham or to his descendants, that he would be heir of the world, was not through the law, but through the righteousness by faith. 14 For if those of the law are heirs, faith is rendered void and the promise is nullified. 15 For the law produces wrath, but where there is no law, neither is there transgression. 16 Because of this, it is by faith, in order that it may be according to grace, so that the promise may be secure to all the descendants, not only to those of the law, but also to those of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all 17 (just as it is written, “I have made you the father of many nations”) before God, in whom he believed, the one who makes the dead alive and who calls the things that are not as though they are, 18 who against hope believed in hope, so that he became the father of many nations, according to what was said, “so will your descendants be.” 19 And not being weak in faith, he considered his own body as good as dead,  because he﻿* was approximately a hundred years old, and the deadness of Sarah’s womb. 20 And he did not waver in unbelief at the promise of God, but was strengthened in faith, giving glory to God 21 and being fully convinced that what he had promised, he was also able to do. 22 Therefore it was credited to him for righteousness. 23 But it was not written for the sake of him alone that it was credited to him, 24 but also for the sake of us to whom it is going to be credited, to those who believe in the one who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, 25 who was handed over on account of our trespasses, and was raised up in the interest of our justification. 
Reconciliation with God through Faith in Christ
5 Therefore, because we﻿* have been declared righteous by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 through whom also we have obtained access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and we boast in the hope of the glory of God. 3 And not only this, but we also boast in our afflictions, because we﻿* know that affliction produces patient endurance, 4 and patient endurance, proven character, and proven character, hope, 5 and hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us. 
6 For while﻿* we were still helpless, yet at the proper time Christ died for the ungodly. 7 For only rarely will someone die on behalf of a righteous person (for on behalf of a good person possibly someone might even dare to die), 8 but God demonstrates his own love for us, in that while﻿* we were still sinners, Christ died for us. 9 Therefore, by much more, because we﻿* have been declared righteous now by his blood, we will be saved through him from the wrath. 10 For if, while we﻿* were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, by much more, having been reconciled, we will be saved by his life. 11 And not only this, but also we are boasting in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation. 
Death Came through Adam but Life Comes through Christ
12 Because of this, just as sin entered into the world through one man, and death through sin, so also death spread to all people because all sinned. 13 For until the law, sin was in the world, but sin is not charged to one’s account when there﻿* is no law. 14 But death reigned from Adam until Moses even over those who did not sin in the likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is a type of the one who is to come. 15 ⌊But the gift is not like the trespass⌋, for if by the trespass of the one, the many died, by much more did the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, multiply to the many. 16 And the gift is not as through the one who sinned, for on the one hand, judgment from the one sin led to condemnation, but the gift, from many trespasses, led to justification. 17 For if by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through the one man, much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ. 18 Consequently therefore, as through one trespass came condemnation to all people, so also through one righteous deed came justification of life to all people. 19 For just as through the disobedience of the one man, the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one, the many will be made righteous. 20 Now the law came in as a side issue, in order that the trespass could increase, but where sin increased, grace was present in greater abundance, 21 so that just as sin reigned in death, so also grace would reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Formerly Dead to Sin, Now Alive in Christ
6 What therefore shall we say? Shall we continue in sin, in order that grace may increase? 2 May it never be! How can we who died to sin still live in it? 3 Or do you not know that as many as were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 4 Therefore we have been buried with him through baptism into death, in order that just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so also we may live ⌊a new way of life⌋. 5 For if we have become identified with him in the likeness of his death, certainly also we will be identified with him in the likeness of his resurrection, 6 knowing this, that our old man was crucified together with him, in order that the body of sin may be done away with, that we may no longer be enslaved to sin. 7 For the one who has died has been freed from sin. 
8 Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him, 9 knowing that Christ, because he﻿* has been raised from the dead, is going to die no more, death no longer being master over him. 10 For that death he died, he died to sin once and never again, but that life he lives, he lives to God. 11 So also you, consider yourselves to be dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus. 
12 Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body, so that you obey its desires, 13 and do not present your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those who are alive from the dead, and your members to God as instruments of righteousness. 14 For sin will not be master over you, because you are not under law, but under grace. 
Set Free from Sin
15 What then? Shall we sin because we are not under law but under grace? May it never be! 16 Do you not know that to whomever you present yourselves as slaves for obedience, you are slaves to whomever you obey, whether sin, leading to death, or obedience, leading to righteousness? 17 But thanks be to God that you were slaves of sin, but you have obeyed from the heart the pattern of teaching to which you were entrusted, 18 and having been set free from sin, you became enslaved to righteousness. 19 (I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh.) For just as you presented your members as slaves to immorality and lawlessness, leading to lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness, leading to sanctification. 20 For when you were slaves of sin, you were free with respect to righteousness. 
21 Therefore what sort of fruit did you have then, about which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. 22 But now, having been set free from sin and having been enslaved to God, you have your fruit leading to sanctification, and its end is eternal life. 23 For the compensation due sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Released from the Law through Death
7 Or do you not know, brothers (for I am speaking to those who know the law), that the law is master of a person for as long a time as he lives? 2 For the married woman is bound by law to her husband while he lives, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law of the husband. 3 Therefore as a result, if she belongs to another man while﻿* her husband is living, she will be called an adulteress. But if her husband dies, she is free from the law, so that she is not an adulteress if she﻿* belongs to another man. 4 So then, my brothers, you also were brought to death with respect to the law through the body of Christ, so that you may belong to another, to the one who was raised from the dead, in order that we may bear fruit for God. 5 For when we were in the flesh, sinful desires were working through the law in our members, to bear fruit for death. 6 But now we have been released from the law, because we﻿* have died to that by which we were bound, so that we may serve in newness of the Spirit and not in oldness of the letter of the law. 
Knowledge of Sin Comes through the Law
7 What then shall we say? Is the law sin? May it never be! But I would not have known sin except through the law, for I would not have known covetousness if the law had not said, “Do not covet.” 8 But sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, produced in me all kinds of covetousness. For apart from the law, sin is dead. 9 And I was alive once, apart from the law, but when﻿* the commandment came, sin sprang to life 10 and I died, and this commandment which was to lead to life was found with respect to me to lead to death. 11 For sin, seizing the opportunity through the commandment, deceived me and through it killed me. 12 So then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good. 
Internal Conflict with Sin
13 Therefore, did that which is good become death to me? May it never be! Rather it was sin, in order that it might be recognized as sin, producing death through what is good for me, in order that sin might become sinful to an extraordinary degree through the commandment. 14 For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, ⌊sold into slavery to sin⌋. 15 For what I am doing I do not understand, because what I want to do, this I do not practice, but what I hate, this I do. 16 But if what I do not want to do, this I do, I agree with the law that it is good. 17 But now I am no longer the one doing it, but sin that lives in me. 18 For I know that good does not live in me, that is, in my flesh. For the willing is present in me, but the doing of the good is not. 19 For the good that I want to do, I do not do, but the evil that I do not want to do, this I do. 20 But if what I do not want to do, this I am doing, I am no longer the one doing it, but sin that lives in me. 
21 Consequently, I find the principle with me, the one who wants to do good, that evil is present with me. 22 For I joyfully agree with the law of God in my inner person, 23 but I observe another law in my members, at war with the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin that exists in my members. 24 Wretched man that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death? 25 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself with my mind am enslaved to the law of God, but with my flesh I am enslaved to the law of sin. 
Set Free from the Law of Sin and Death
8 Consequently, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. 2 For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and death. 3 For what was impossible for the law, in that it was weak through the flesh, God did. By﻿* sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and concerning sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, 4 in order that the requirement of the law would be fulfilled in us, who do not live according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. 5 For those who are living according to the flesh are intent on the things of the flesh, but those who are living according to the Spirit are intent on the things of the Spirit. 6 For the mindset of the flesh is death, but the mindset of the Spirit is life and peace, 7 because the mindset of the flesh is enmity toward God, for it is not subjected to the law of God, for it is not able to do so, 8 and those who are in the flesh are not able to please God. 
9 But you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God lives in you. But if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, this person ⌊does not belong to him⌋. 10 But if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness. 11 And if the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead lives in you, the one who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also make alive your mortal bodies through his Spirit who lives in you. 
12 So then, brothers, we are obligated not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh. 13 For if you live according to the flesh, you are going to die, but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. 14 For all those who are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God. 15 For you have not received a spirit of slavery leading to fear again, but you have received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry out, “Abba! Father!” 16 The Spirit himself confirms to our spirit that we are children of God, 17 and if children, also heirs—heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, if indeed we suffer together with him so that we may also be glorified together with him. 
The Glory that is to be Revealed
18 For I consider that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that is about to be revealed to us. 19 For the eagerly expecting creation awaits eagerly the revelation of the sons of God. 20 For the creation has been subjected to futility, not willingly, but because of the one who subjected it, in hope 21 that the creation itself also will be set free from its servility to decay, into the glorious freedom of the children of God. 22 For we know that the whole creation groans together and suffers agony together until now. 23 Not only this, but we ourselves also, having the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves while we﻿* await eagerly our adoption, the redemption of our body. 24 For in hope we were saved, but hope that is seen is not hope, for who hopes for what he sees? 25 But if we hope for what we do not see, we await it eagerly with patient endurance. 
26 And likewise also, the Spirit helps us in our weakness, for we do not know how to pray as one ought, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with unexpressed groanings. 27 And the one who searches our hearts knows what the mindset of the Spirit is, because he intercedes on behalf of the saints according to the will of God. 28 And we know that all things work together for good for those who love God, for those who are called according to his purpose, 29 because those whom he foreknew, he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, so that he should be the firstborn among many brothers. 30 And those whom he predestined, these he also called, and those whom he called, these he also justified, and those whom he justified, these he also glorified. 
Victory in Christ
31 What then shall we say about these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? 32 Indeed, he who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all, how will he not also, together with him, freely give us all things? 33 Who will bring charges against God’s elect? God is the one who justifies. 34 Who is the one who condemns? Christ is the one who died, and more than that, who was raised, who is also at the right hand of God, who also intercedes for us. 35 Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will affliction or distress or persecution or hunger or lack of sufficient clothing or danger or the sword? 36 Just as it is written, 
“On account of you we are being put to death the whole day long; 
we are considered as sheep for slaughter.” 
37 No, but in all these things we prevail completely through the one who loved us. 38 For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, 39 nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Israel’s Rejection
9 I am telling the truth in Christ—I am not lying; my conscience bears witness to me in the Holy Spirit—2 that my grief is great and there is constant distress in my heart. 3 For I could wish myself to be accursed from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my fellow countrymen according to the flesh, 4 who are Israelites, to whom belong the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the temple service, and the promises, 5 to whom belong the patriarchs, and from whom is the Christ according to human descent, who is God over all, blessed ⌊forever⌋! Amen. 
6 But it is not as if the word of God had failed. For not all those who are descended from Israel are truly Israel, 7 nor are they all children because they are descendants of Abraham, but “In Isaac will your descendants be named.” 8 That is, it is not the children ⌊by human descent⌋ who are children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as descendants. 9 For the statement of the promise is this: “At this time I will return and ⌊Sarah will have⌋ a son.” 10 And not only this, but also when﻿* Rebecca conceived children by one man, Isaac our father—11 for although they﻿* had not yet been born, or done anything good or evil, in order that the purpose of God according to election might remain, 12 not by works but by the one who calls—it was said to her, “The older will serve the younger,” 13 just as it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.” 
God’s Sovereign Choice to Show Mercy
14 What then shall we say? There is no injustice with God, is there?* May it never be! 15 For to Moses he says, “I will have mercy on whomever I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whomever I have compassion.” 16 Consequently therefore, ⌊it does not depend on the⌋ one who wills or on the one who runs, but on God who shows mercy. 17 For the scripture says to Pharaoh, “For this very reason I have raised you up, so that I may demonstrate my power in you, and so that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.” 18 Consequently therefore, he has mercy on whomever he wishes, and he hardens whomever he wishes. 
19 Therefore you will say to me, “Why then does he still find fault? For who has resisted his will? 20 On the contrary, O man, who are you who answers back to God? Will what is molded say to the one who molded it, “Why did you make me like this”? 21 Or does the potter not have authority over the clay, to make from the same lump a vessel that is for ⌊honorable use⌋ and one that is for ⌊ordinary use⌋? 22 And what if God, wanting to demonstrate his wrath and to make known his power, endured with much patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction? 23 And he did so﻿* in order that he could make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy that he prepared beforehand for glory, 24 us whom he also called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles? 25 As he also says in Hosea, 
“I will call those who were not my people, ‘My people,’ 
and those who were not loved, ‘Loved.’ 
26 And it will be in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ 
there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’ ” 
27 And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel, 
“Even if the number of the sons of Israel is like the sand of the sea, 
the remnant will be saved, 
28 ⌊for the Lord will execute his sentence thoroughly and decisively⌋ upon the earth.” 
29 And just as Isaiah foretold, 
“If the Lord of hosts had not left us descendants, 
we would have become like Sodom 
and would have resembled Gomorrah.” 
30 What then shall we say? That the Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, attained righteousness—even the righteousness that is by faith. 31 But Israel, pursuing the law of righteousness, did not attain to the law. 32 Why that? Because they did not pursue it by faith, but as if by works. They stumbled over the ⌊stone that causes people to stumble⌋, 33 just as it is written, 
“Behold, I am laying in Zion ⌊a stone that causes people to stumble⌋, 
and ⌊a rock that causes them to fall⌋, 
and the one who believes in him will not be put to shame.” 
The Righteousness of God through Faith in Christ
10 Brothers, the desire of my heart and my prayer to God on behalf of them is for their salvation. 2 For I testify about them that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge. 3 For ignoring the righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God. 4 For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes. 
5 For Moses writes about the righteousness that is from the law: “The person who does this will live by it.”  6 But the righteousness from faith speaks like this: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ ” (that is, to bring Christ down), 7 or “Who will descend into the abyss?” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead). 8 But what does it say? “The word is near to you, in your mouth and in your heart” (that is, the word of faith that we proclaim), 9 that if you confess with your mouth “Jesus is Lord” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. 10 For with the heart one believes, resulting in righteousness, and with the mouth one confesses, resulting in salvation. 11 For the scripture says, “Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame.” 12 For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord is Lord of all, who is rich to all who call upon him. 13 For “everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord will be saved.” 
14 How then will they call upon him in whom they have not believed? And how will they believe in him about whom they have not heard? And how will they hear about him without one who preaches to them? 15 And how will they preach, unless they are sent? Just as it is written, “How timely are the feet of those who bring good news of good things.” 16 But not all have obeyed the good news, for Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our report?” 17 Consequently, faith comes by hearing, and hearing through the word about Christ. 
18 But I say, they have not heard, have they?* On the contrary, 
“Their voice has gone out to all the earth, 
and their words to the ends of the inhabited world.” 
19 But I say, Israel did not know, did they?* First, Moses says, 
“I will provoke you to jealousy by those who are not a nation; 
by a senseless nation I will provoke you to anger.” 
20 And Isaiah is very bold and says, 
“I was found by those who did not seek me; 
I became known to those who did not ask for me.” 
21 But about Israel he says, 
“The whole day long I held out my hands 
to a disobedient and resistant people.” 
A Remnant of Israel Remains
11 Therefore I say, God has not rejected his people, has he?* May it never be! For I also am an Israelite, from the descendants of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. 2 God has not rejected his people, whom he foreknew! Or do you not know, in the passage about﻿* Elijah, what the scripture says—how he appeals to God against Israel? 3 “Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have torn down your altars, and I alone am left, and they are seeking my life!” 4 But what does the divine response say to him? “I have left for myself seven thousand people who have not bent the knee to Baal.” 5 So in this way also at the present time, there is a remnant ⌊selected by grace⌋. 6 But if by grace, it is no longer by works, for otherwise grace would no longer be grace. 
7 What then? What Israel was searching for, this it did not obtain. But the elect obtained it, and the rest were hardened, 8 just as it is written, 
“God gave them a spirit of stupor, 
eyes that do not see and ears that do not hear, 
until this very day.” 
9 And David says, 
“Let their table become a snare and a trap, 
and a cause for stumbling and a retribution to them; 
10 let their eyes be darkened so that they do not see, 
and cause their backs to bend ⌊continually⌋.” 
11 I say then, they did not stumble so that they fell, did they?* May it never be! But by their trespass, salvation has come to the Gentiles, in order to provoke them to jealousy.* 12 And if their trespass means riches for the world and their loss means riches for the Gentiles, how much more will their fullness mean? 
Gentile Branches Grafted in
13 Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Therefore, inasmuch as I am apostle to the Gentiles, I promote my ministry, 14 if somehow I may provoke my people to jealousy and save some of them. 15 For if their rejection means the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance mean except life from the dead? 16 Now if the first fruits are holy, so also is the whole batch of dough, and if the root is holy, so also are the branches. 
17 Now if some of the branches were broken off, and you, although you﻿* were a wild olive tree, were grafted in among them and became a sharer of the root of the olive tree’s richness, 18 do not boast against the branches. But if you boast against them, you do not support the root, but the root supports you. 19 Then you will say, “Branches were broken off in order that I could be grafted in.” 20 Well said! They were broken off because of unbelief, but you stand firm because of faith. Do not think arrogant thoughts, but be afraid. 21 For if God did not spare the ⌊natural⌋ branches, neither will he spare you. 22 See, then, the kindness and severity of God: severity upon those who have fallen, but upon you the kindness of God—if you continue in his kindness, for otherwise you also will be cut off. 23 And those also, if they do not persist in unbelief, will be grafted in, because God is able to graft them in again. 24 For if you were cut off from what is by nature a wild olive tree, and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these who are ⌊natural branches⌋ be grafted into their own olive tree? 
All Israel to be Saved
25 For I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, of this mystery, so that you will not be wise ⌊in your own sight⌋, that a partial hardening has happened to Israel, until the full number of the Gentiles has come in, 26 and so all Israel will be saved, just as it is written, 
“The deliverer will come out of Zion; 
he will turn away ungodliness from Jacob. 
27 And this is the covenant from me with them 
when I take away their sins.” 
28 With respect to the gospel, they are enemies for your sake, but with respect to election, they are dearly loved for the sake of the fathers. 29 For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable. 30 For just as you formerly were disobedient to God, but now have been shown mercy because of the disobedience of these, 31 so also these have now been disobedient for your mercy, in order that they also may now be shown mercy. 32 For God confined them all in disobedience, in order that he could have mercy on them all. 
33 Oh, the depth of the riches 
and the wisdom and the knowledge of God! 
How unsearchable are his judgments 
and how incomprehensible are his ways! 
34 “For who has known the mind of the Lord, 
or who has been his counselor? 
35 Or who has given in advance to him, 
and it will be paid back to him?” 
36 For from him and through him and to him are all things. 
To him be glory for eternity! Amen. 
A Life Dedicated to God
12 Therefore I exhort you, brothers, through the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God, which is your reasonable service. 2 And do not be conformed to this age, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, so that you may approve what is the good and well-pleasing and perfect will of God. 
A Variety of Gifts in the Body of Christ
3 For by the grace given to me I say to everyone who is among you not to think more highly of yourself than what one ought to think, but to think ⌊sensibly⌋, as God has apportioned a measure of faith to each one. 4 For just as in one body we have many members, but all the members do not have the same function, 5 in the same way we who are many are one body in Christ, and ⌊individually⌋ members of one another, 6 but having different gifts according to the grace given to us: if it is prophecy, according to the proportion of his faith; 7 if it is service, by service; if it is one who teaches, by teaching; 8 if it is one who exhorts, by exhortation; one who gives, with sincerity; one who leads, with diligence; one who shows mercy, with cheerfulness. 
Living in Love
9 Love must be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is evil; be attached to what is good, 10 being devoted to one another in brotherly love, esteeming one another more highly in honor, 11 not lagging in diligence, being enthusiastic in spirit, serving the Lord, 12 rejoicing in hope, enduring in affliction, being devoted to prayer, 13 contributing to the needs of the saints, pursuing hospitality. 
14 Bless those who persecute, bless and do not curse them. 15 Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep. 16 Think the same thing toward one another; ⌊do not think arrogantly⌋, but associate with the lowly. Do not be wise ⌊in your own sight⌋. 17 Pay back no one evil for evil. Take thought for what is good in the sight of all people. 18 If it is possible on your part, be at peace with all people. 19 Do not take revenge yourselves, dear friends, but give place to God’s wrath, for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay,” says the Lord. 20 But “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by﻿* doing this, you will heap up coals of fire upon his head.” 21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good. 
Obedience to the Governing Authorities
13 Let every person be subject to the governing authorities, for there is no authority except by God, and those that exist are put in place by God. 2 So then, the one who resists authority resists the ordinance which is from God, and those who resist will receive condemnation on themselves. 3 For rulers are not a cause of terror for a good deed, but for bad conduct. So do you want not to be afraid of authority? Do what is good, and you will have praise from it, 4 for it is God’s servant to you for what is good. But if you do what is bad, be afraid, because it does not bear the sword to no purpose. For it is God’s servant, the one who avenges for punishment on the one who does what is bad. 5 Therefore it is necessary to be in subjection, not only because of wrath but also because of conscience. 6 For because of this you also pay taxes, for the authorities are servants of God, busily engaged in this very thing. 7 Pay to everyone what is owed: pay taxes to whom taxes are due; pay customs duties to whom customs duties are due; pay respect to whom respect is due; pay honor to whom honor is due. 
Love Fulfills the Law
8 Owe nothing to anyone, except to love one another, for the one who loves someone else has fulfilled the law. 9 For the commandments, “You shall not commit adultery, you shall not commit murder, you shall not steal, you shall not covet,” and if there is any other commandment, are summed up in this statement: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” 10 Love does not commit evil against a neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law. 
11 And do this because you﻿* know the time, that it is already the hour for you to wake up from sleep. For our salvation is nearer now than when we believed. 12 The night is far gone, and the day has drawn near. Therefore let us throw off the deeds of darkness and put on the weapons of light. 13 Let us live decently, as in the day, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and licentiousness, not in strife and jealousy. 14 But put on the Lord Jesus Christ and do not make provision for the desires of the flesh. 
Do Not Pass Judgment on One Another
14 Now receive the one who is weak in faith, but not for quarrels about opinions. 2 One believes he may eat all things, but the one who is weak eats only vegetables. 3 The one who eats must not despise the one who does not eat, and the one who does not eat must not judge the one who eats, because God has accepted him. 4 Who are you, who passes judgment on the domestic slave belonging to someone else? To his own master he stands or falls, and he will stand, for the Lord is able to make him stand. 
5 One person prefers one day over another day, and another person regards every day alike. Each one must be fully convinced in his own mind. 6 The one who is intent on the day is intent on it for the Lord, and the one who eats eats for the Lord, because he is thankful to God, and the one who does not eat does not eat for the Lord, and he is thankful to God. 7 For none of us lives for himself and none dies for himself. 8 For if we live, we live for the Lord, and if we die, we die for the Lord. Therefore whether we live or whether we die, we are the Lord’s. 9 For Christ died and became alive again for this reason, in order that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living. 
10 But why do you judge your brother? Or also, why do you despise your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God. 11 For it is written, 
“As I live, says the Lord, every knee will bow to me, 
and every tongue will praise God.” 
12 So each one of us will give an account concerning himself. 
13 Therefore, let us no longer pass judgment on one another, but rather decide this: not to place a cause for stumbling or a temptation before a brother. 14 I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean of itself, except to the one who considers something to be unclean; to that person it is unclean. 15 For if because of food, your brother is grieved, you are no longer living according to love. Do not destroy by your food that person for whom Christ died. 16 Therefore do not let your good be slandered. 17 For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. 18 For the one who serves Christ in this way is well-pleasing to God and approved by people. 
19 So then, let us pursue ⌊what promotes peace⌋ and ⌊what edifies one another⌋. 20 Do not destroy the work of God on account of food. All things are clean, but it is wrong for the person ⌊who eats and stumbles in the process⌋. 21 It is good not to eat meat or to drink wine or to do anything by which your brother stumbles or is offended or is weakened. 22 The faith that you have, have with respect to yourself before God. Blessed is the one who does not pass judgment on himself by what he approves. 23 But the one who doubts is condemned if he eats, because he does not do so from faith, and everything that is not from faith is sin. 
Accept One Another according to Christ’s Example
15 But we who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the weak, and not to please ourselves. 2 Let each one of us please his neighbor for his good, for the purpose of edification. 3 For even Christ did not please himself, but just as it is written, “The insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.” 4 For whatever was written beforehand was written for our instruction, in order that through patient endurance and through the encouragement of the scriptures we may have hope. 5 Now may the God of patient endurance and of encouragement grant you ⌊to be in agreement⌋ with one another, in accordance with Christ Jesus, 6 so that with one mind you may glorify with one mouth the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 7 Therefore accept one another, just as Christ also has accepted you, to the glory of God. 
8 For I say, Christ has become a servant of the circumcision on behalf of the truth of God, in order to confirm the promises to the fathers, 9 and that the Gentiles may glorify God for his mercy, just as it is written, 
“Because of this, I will praise you among the Gentiles, 
and I will sing praise to your name.” 
10 And again it says, 
“Rejoice, Gentiles, with his people.” 
11 And again, 
“Praise the Lord, all the Gentiles, 
and let all the peoples praise him.” 
12 And again Isaiah says, 
“The root of Jesse will come, 
even the one who rises to rule over the Gentiles; 
in him the Gentiles will put their hope.” 
13 Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit. 
Paul’s Ministry to the Gentiles
14 Now I myself also am convinced about you, my brothers, that you yourselves also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to instruct one another. 15 But I have written to you more boldly on some points, so as to remind you again because of the grace that has been given to me by God, 16 with the result that I am a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, serving the gospel of God as a priest, in order that the offering of the Gentiles may become acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit. 17 Therefore I have a reason for boasting in Christ Jesus regarding the things concerning God. 18 For I will not dare to speak about anything except that which Christ has accomplished through me, resulting in the obedience of the Gentiles by word and deed, 19 by the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit, so that from Jerusalem and traveling around as far as Illyricum I have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ. 20 And so, having as my ambition to proclaim the gospel where Christ has not been named, in order that I will not build on the foundation belonging to someone else, 21 but just as it is written, 
“Those to whom it was not announced concerning him will see, 
and those who have not heard will understand.” 
Paul’s Travel Plans
22 For this reason also I was hindered many times from coming to you, 23 and now, no longer having a place in these regions, but having a desire for many years to come to you 24 whenever I travel to Spain. For I hope while I﻿* am passing through to see you and to be sent on my way by you, whenever I have first enjoyed your company for a while. 25 But now I am traveling to Jerusalem, serving the saints. 26 For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make some contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem. 27 For they were pleased to do so, and they are obligated to them. For if the Gentiles have shared in their spiritual things, they ought also to serve them in material things. 28 Therefore, after I﻿* have accomplished this and sealed this fruit for delivery to them, I will depart by way of you for Spain, 29 and I know that when I﻿* come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of Christ. 
30 Now I exhort you, brothers, through our Lord Jesus Christ and through the love of the Spirit, to contend along with me in your prayers on my behalf to God, 31 that I may be rescued from those who are disobedient in Judea, and my ministry in Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints, 32 so that, coming to you with joy by the will of God, I may rest with you. 33 Now may the God of peace be with all of you. Amen. 
Many Personal Greetings
16 Now I commend to you Phoebe our sister, who is also a servant of the church in Cenchrea, 2 in order that you may welcome her in the Lord in a manner worthy of the saints, and help her in whatever task she may have need from you, for she herself also has been a helper of many, even me myself. 
3 Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus, 4 who risked their own necks for my life, for which not only I am thankful, but also all the churches of the Gentiles; 5 also greet the church in their house. Greet Epenetus my dear friend, who is ⌊the first convert⌋ of Asia for Christ. 6 Greet Mary, who ⌊has worked hard⌋ for you. 7 Greet Andronicus and Junia, my compatriots and my fellow prisoners, who are well known to the apostles, who were also in Christ before me. 8 Greet Ampliatus, my dear friend in the Lord. 9 Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my dear friend Stachys. 10 Greet Apelles, who is approved in Christ. Greet those of the household of Aristobulus. 11 Greet Herodion my compatriot. Greet those of the household of Narcissus who are in the Lord. 12 Greet Tryphena and Tryphosa, the laborers in the Lord. Greet Persis, the dear friend who ⌊has worked hard⌋ in the Lord. 13 Greet Rufus, the chosen one in the Lord, and his mother and mine. 14 Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them. 15 Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them. 16 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you. 
Concluding Exhortations
17 Now I exhort you, brothers, to look out for those who cause dissensions and temptations contrary to the teaching which you learned, and stay away from them. 18 For such people do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own stomach, and by smooth speech and flattery they deceive the hearts of the unsuspecting. 19 For the report of your obedience has reached to all; therefore I am rejoicing over you, and I want you to be wise toward what is good, but innocent toward what is evil. 20 And in a short time the God of peace will crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 
Greetings from Paul’s Associates
21 Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you, and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my compatriots. 
22 I, Tertius, the one who wrote this letter, greet you in the Lord. 
23 Gaius, my host and the host of the whole church, greets you. Erastus the city treasurer greets you, and Quartus the brother. 
Benediction
24 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you. Amen.

THE FIRST LETTER OF PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother, 2 to the church of God sanctified in Christ Jesus that is in Corinth, called to be saints, together with all those who call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, their Lord﻿* and ours. 3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Thanksgiving for the Corinthian Believers
4 I give thanks to my God always concerning you, because of the grace of God which was given to you in Christ Jesus, 5 that﻿* in everything you were made rich in him, in all speech and all knowledge, 6 just as the testimony about Christ has been confirmed in you, 7 so that you do not lack in any spiritual gift as you﻿* eagerly await the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 8 who will also confirm you until the end, blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 9 God is faithful, by whom you were called to fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Divisions in the Church at Corinth
10 Now I exhort you, brothers, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all say the same thing and there not be divisions among you, and that you be made complete in the same mind and with the same purpose. 11 For it has been made clear to me concerning you, my brothers, by ⌊Chloe’s people⌋, that there are quarrels among you. 12 But I say this, that each of you is saying, “I am with Paul,” and “I am with Apollos,” and “I am with Cephas,” and “I am with Christ.” 13 Has Christ been divided? Paul was not crucified for you, was he?* Or were you baptized in the name of Paul? 14 I give thanks that I baptized none of you except Crispus and Gaius, 15 lest anyone should say that you were baptized in my name. 16 (Now I also baptized the household of Stephanas. Beyond that I do not know if I baptized anyone else.) 17 For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to proclaim the gospel, not with ⌊clever speech⌋, lest the cross of Christ be emptied. 
Christ Crucified, the Power and Wisdom of God
18 For the message about the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. 19 For it is written, 
“I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 
and the intelligence of the intelligent I will confound.” 
20 Where is the wise person? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 21 For since, in the wisdom of God, the world through its wisdom did not know God, God was pleased through the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe. 22 For indeed, Jews ask for sign miracles and Greeks seek wisdom, 23 but we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a cause for stumbling, but to the Gentiles foolishness, 24 but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God. 25 For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength. 
Boast in the Lord
26 For consider your calling, brothers, that not many were wise according to human standards, not many were powerful, not many were well born. 27 But the foolish things of the world God chose in order that he might put to shame the wise, and the weak things of the world God chose in order that he might put to shame the strong, 28 and the insignificant of the world, and the despised, God chose, the things that are not, in order that he might abolish the things that are, 29 so that all flesh may not boast before God. 30 But from him you are in Christ Jesus, who became wisdom to us from God, and righteousness and sanctification and redemption, 31 so that, just as it is written, “The one who boasts, let him boast in the Lord.” 
Paul’s Approach to Ministry in Corinth
2 And I, when I﻿* came to you, brothers, did not come with superiority of speech or of wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony of God. 2 For I decided not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ and him crucified. 3 And I came to you in weakness and in fear and with much trembling, 4 and my speech and my preaching were not with the persuasiveness of wisdom, but with a demonstration of the Spirit and power, 5 in order that your faith would not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. 
The Wisdom Revealed by the Spirit
6 Now we do speak wisdom among the mature, but wisdom not of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are perishing, 7 but we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, which God predestined before the ages for our glory, 8 which none of the rulers of this age knew. For if they had known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 9 But just as it is written, 
“Things which eye has not seen and ear has not heard, 
and have not entered into the heart of man, 
all that God has prepared for those who love him.” 
10 For to us God has revealed them through the Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God. 11 For who among men knows the things of a man, except the spirit of the man that is in him? Thus also no one knows the things of God except the Spirit of God. 12 Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, in order that we may know the things freely given to us by God, 13 things which we also speak, not in words taught by human wisdom, but in words taught by the Spirit, explaining spiritual things to spiritual people. 14 But the natural man does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, and he is not able to understand them, because they are spiritually discerned. 15 Now the spiritual person discerns all things, but he himself is judged by no one. 16 “For who has known the mind of the Lord; who has advised him?” But we have the mind of Christ. 
Divisiveness and Immaturity
3 And I, brothers, was not able to speak to you as to spiritual people, but as to fleshly people, as to infants in Christ. 2 I gave you milk to drink, not solid food, for you were not yet able to eat it. But now you are still not able, 3 for you are still fleshly. For where there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not fleshly, and do you not live like unregenerate people? 4 For whenever anyone says, “I am with Paul,” and another, “I am with Apollos,” are you not merely human? 
5 Therefore, what is Apollos and what is Paul? Servants through whom you believed, and to each as the Lord gave. 6 I planted, Apollos watered, but God was causing it to grow. 7 So then, neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but God who is causing it to grow. 8 Now the one who plants and the one who waters are one, but each one will receive his own reward according to his own labor. 9 For we are God’s fellow workers; you are God’s field, God’s building. 
10 According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master builder I laid a foundation, and another is building upon it. But each one must direct his attention to how he is building upon it. 11 For no one is able to lay another foundation than the one which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 12 Now if anyone builds upon the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, grass, straw, 13 the work of each one will become evident. For the day will reveal it, because it will be revealed with fire, and the fire itself will test the work of each one, of what sort it is. 14 If anyone’s work that he has built upon it remains, he will receive a reward. 15 If anyone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved, but so as through fire. 
16 Do you not know that you are God’s temple and the Spirit of God dwells in you? 17 If anyone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy this one. For God’s temple is holy, which you are. 
18 Let no one deceive himself. If anyone thinks himself to be wise among you in this age, let him become a fool, in order that he may become wise. 19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it is written, “The one who catches the wise in their craftiness,” 20 and again, “The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are futile.” 21 So then, let no one boast in people. For all things are yours, 22 whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or things present or things to come, all things are yours, 23 and you are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s. 
Christ’s Servant, God’s Steward
4 Thus let a person consider us as servants of Christ and stewards of God’s mysteries. 2 In this case, moreover, it is sought in stewards that one be found faithful. 3 But to me it is a very little matter that I be judged by you or by a human court, but I do not even judge myself. 4 For I am conscious of nothing against myself, but not by this am I vindicated. But the one who judges me is the Lord. 5 Therefore do not judge anything before the time, until the Lord should come, who will both enlighten the hidden things of darkness and will reveal the counsels of hearts, and then praise will come to each one from God. 
The Apostles’ Humility
6 Now I have applied these things, brothers, to myself and Apollos for your sake, in order that in us you may learn not to go beyond what is written, lest someone be inflated with pride on behalf of one person against the other. 7 For who concedes you superiority? And what do you have that you did not receive? But if indeed you received it, why do you boast as if you﻿* did not receive it? 8 Already you are satiated! Already you are rich! Apart from us you reign as kings! And would that indeed you reigned as kings, in order that we also might reign as kings with you! 9 For, I think, God has exhibited us apostles last of all, as condemned to death, because we have become a spectacle to the world and to angels and to people. 10 We are fools for the sake of Christ, but you are prudent in Christ! We are weak, but you are strong! You are honored, but we are dishonored! 11 Until the present hour we are both hungry and thirsty and poorly clothed and roughly treated and homeless, 12 and we toil, working with our own hands. When we are﻿* reviled, we bless; when we are﻿* persecuted, we endure; 13 when we are﻿* slandered, we encourage. We have become like the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things, until now. 
Paul’s Concern for the Corinthian Believers
14 I am not writing these things to shame you, but admonishing you as my dear children. 15 For if you have ten thousand guardians in Christ, yet you do not have many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I fathered you through the gospel. 16 Therefore I exhort you, become imitators of me. 17 Because of this, I have sent to you Timothy, who is my dear and faithful child in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways in Christ Jesus, just as I teach everywhere in every church. 18 But some have become arrogant, as if I were not coming to you. 19 But I am coming to you soon, if the Lord wills, and I will know not the talk of the ones who have become arrogant, but the power. 20 For the kingdom of God is not with talk, but with power. 21 What do you want? Shall I come to you with a rod, or with love and a spirit of gentleness? 
Immoral Behavior and Church Discipline
5 It is reported everywhere that there is sexual immorality among you, and sexual immorality of such a kind which does not even exist among the Gentiles, so that someone has the wife of his father. 2 And you are inflated with pride, and should you not rather have mourned, so that the one who has done this deed would be removed from your midst? 3 For although I﻿* am absent in body but present in spirit, I have already passed judgment on the one who has done this in this way, as if I﻿* were present. 4 In the name of our Lord Jesus, when﻿* you are assembled, and my spirit, together with the power of our Lord Jesus, 5 I have decided﻿* to hand over such a person to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, in order that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. 
6 Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven leavens the whole batch of dough? 7 Clean out the old leaven in order that you may be a new batch of dough, just as you are unleavened. For Christ our Passover has been sacrificed. 8 So then, let us celebrate the feast, not with the old leaven or with the leaven of wickedness and sinfulness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 
9 I wrote to you in the letter not to associate with sexually immoral people. 10 By no means did I mean the sexually immoral people of this world or the greedy people and swindlers or idolaters, since then you would have to depart out of the world. 11 But now I have written to you not to associate with any so-called brother, if he is a sexually immoral person or a greedy person or an idolater or an abusive person or a drunkard or a swindler—with such a person not even to eat. 12 For what is it to me to judge those outside? Should you not judge those inside? 13 But those outside God will judge. Remove the evil person ⌊from among yourselves⌋. 
Lawsuits between Believers
6 Does anyone among you, if he﻿* has a matter against someone else, dare to go to court before the unrighteous, and not before the saints? 2 Or do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if by you the world is judged, are you unworthy of the most insignificant courts? 3 Do you not know that we will judge angels, not to mention ordinary matters? 4 Therefore, if you have courts with regard to ordinary matters, do you seat these despised people in the church? 5 I say this to your shame. So is there not anyone wise among you who will be able to render a decision between his brothers? 6 But brother goes to court with brother, and this before unbelievers! 7 Therefore it is already completely a loss for you that you have lawsuits with one another. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded? 8 But you wrong and defraud, and do this to brothers! 
9 Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived! Neither sexually immoral people, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor passive homosexual partners, nor dominant homosexual partners, 10 nor thieves, nor greedy persons, not drunkards, not abusive persons, not swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. 11 And some of you were these things, but you were washed, but you were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God. 
Avoid Sexual Immorality
12 All things are permitted for me, but not all things are profitable. All things are permitted for me, but I will not be controlled by anything. 13 Food is for the stomach, and the stomach for food, but God will abolish ⌊both of them⌋. Now the body is not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. 14 And God both raised up the Lord and will raise us up by his power. 15 Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Therefore, shall I take away the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? May it never be! 16 Or do you not know that the one who joins himself to a prostitute is one body with her? For it says, “The two will become one flesh.” 17 But the one who joins himself to the Lord is one spirit with him. 18 Flee sexual immorality. Every sin that a person commits is outside his body, but the one who commits sexual immorality sins against his own body. 19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own? 20 For you were bought at a price; therefore glorify God with your body. 
Concerning Christian Marriage
7 Now concerning the things about which you wrote: “It is good for a man not to touch a woman.” 2 But because of sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife and let each woman have her own husband. 3 The husband must fulfill his obligation to his wife, and likewise also the wife to her husband. 4 The wife does not have authority over her own body, but her husband does. And likewise also the husband does not have authority over his own body, but his wife does. 5 Do not defraud one another, except perhaps by agreement, for a time, in order that you may devote yourselves to prayer, and then you should be ⌊together⌋ again, lest Satan tempt you because of your lack of self control. 6 But I say this as a concession, not as a command. 7 I wish all people could be like myself, but each one has his own gift from God, one in this way and another in that way. 
8 Now I say to the unmarried and to the widows: It is good for them if they remain as I am. 9 But if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with sexual desire. 
10 To the married I command—not I, but the Lord—a wife must not separate from her husband. 11 But if indeed she does separate, she must remain unmarried or be reconciled to her husband. And a husband must not divorce his wife. 
12 Now to the rest I say—not the Lord—if any brother has an unbelieving wife and she consents to live with him, he must not divorce her. 13 And if any wife has an unbelieving husband and he consents to live with her, she must not divorce her husband. 14 For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the brother, since otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy. 15 But if the unbeliever leaves, let him leave. The brother or the sister is not bound in such cases. But God has called us in peace. 16 For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife? 
17 But to each one as the Lord has apportioned. As God has called each one, thus let him live—and thus I order in all the churches. 18 Was anyone called after﻿* being circumcised? He must not undo his circumcision. Was anyone called in uncircumcision? He must not become circumcised. 19 Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God. 20 Each one in the calling in which he was called—in this he should remain. 21 Were you called while a slave? Do not let it be a concern to you. But if indeed you are able to become free, rather make use of it. 22 For the one who is called in the Lord while a slave is the Lord’s freedperson. Likewise the one who is called while free is a slave of Christ. 23 You were bought at a price; do not become slaves of men. 24 Each one in the situation in which he was called, brothers—in this he should remain with God. 
Concerning the Unmarried
25 Now concerning virgins I do not have a command from the Lord, but I am giving an opinion as one shown mercy by the Lord to be trustworthy. 26 Therefore, I consider this to be good because of the impending distress, that it is good for a man to be thus. 27 Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek release. Are you free from a wife? Do not seek a wife. 28 But if you marry, you have not sinned, and if the virgin marries, she has not sinned. But such people will have affliction in the flesh, and I would spare you. 29 But I say this, brothers: the time is shortened, that from now on even those who have wives should be as if they do not have wives, 30 and those who weep as if they do not weep, and those who rejoice as if they do not rejoice, and those who buy as if they do not possess, 31 and those who make use of the world as if they do not make full use of it. For the present form of this world is passing away. 
32 But I want you to be free from care. The unmarried person cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord. 33 But the one who is married cares for the things of the world, how he may please his wife, 34 and he is divided. And the unmarried woman or the virgin cares for the things of the Lord, in order that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But the married woman cares for the things of the world, how she may please her husband. 35 Now I am saying this for your own benefit, not that I may put a restriction on you, but to promote appropriate and devoted service to the Lord without distraction. 
36 But if anyone thinks he is behaving dishonorably concerning his virgin, if she is past her prime and it ought to be thus, let him do what he wishes. He does not sin. Let them marry. 37 But he who stands firm in his heart, not having necessity, but has authority concerning his own will, and has decided this in his own heart, to keep his own virgin, he will do well. 38 So then, the one who marries his own virgin does well, and the one who does not marry her will do better. 
39 A wife is bound for as long a time as her husband lives. But if her husband ⌊dies⌋, she is free to marry whomever she wishes, only in the Lord. 40 But she is happier if she remains thus, according to my opinion—and I think I have the Spirit of God. 
Concerning Food Sacrificed to Idols
8 Now concerning food sacrificed to idols, we know that “we all have knowledge.” Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. 2 If anyone thinks he knows anything, he has not yet known as it is necessary to know. 3 But if anyone loves God, this one is known by him. 
4 Therefore, concerning the eating of food sacrificed to idols, we know that “an idol is nothing in the world” and that “there is no God except one.” 5 For even if after all there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many gods and many lords, 
6 yet to us there is one God, the Father, 
from whom are all things, and we are for him, 
and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, 
through whom are all things, and we are through him. 
7 But this knowledge is not in everyone. But some, being accustomed until now to the idol, eat this food as food sacrificed to idols, and their conscience, because it﻿* is weak, is defiled. 8 But food does not bring us close to God. For neither if we eat do we have more, nor if we do not eat do we lack. 9 But watch out lest somehow this right of yours becomes a cause for stumbling to the weak. 10 For if someone should see you who has knowledge reclining for a meal in an idol’s temple, will not his conscience, because it﻿* is weak, be strengthened so that he eats the food sacrificed to idols? 11 For the one who is weak—the brother for whom Christ died—is destroyed by your knowledge. 12 Now if you﻿* sin in this way against the brothers and wound their conscience, which is weak, you sin against Christ. 13 Therefore, if food causes my brother to sin, I will never eat meat ⌊forever⌋, in order that I may not cause my brother to sin. 
Paul Gives Up His Rights as an Apostle
9 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord? 2 If to others I am not an apostle, yet indeed I am to you, for you are my seal of apostleship in the Lord. 3 My defense to those who examine me is this: 4 Do we not have the right to eat and drink? 5 Do we not have the right to take along a sister as wife, like the rest of the apostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas? 6 Or do only I and Barnabas not have the right ⌊to refrain from working⌋? 7 Who ever serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat the fruit of it? Who shepherds a flock and does not drink from the milk of the flock? 8 I am not saying these things according to a human perspective. Or does the law not also say these things? 9 For in the law of Moses it is written, “You must not muzzle an ox while it﻿* is threshing.” It is not about oxen God is concerned, is it?* 10 Or doubtless does he speak ⌊for our sake⌋? For it is written ⌊for our sake⌋, because the one who plows ought to plow in hope and the one who threshes ought to do so in hope of a share. 11 If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too great a thing if we reap material things from you? 12 If others share this right over you, do we not do so even more? Yet we have not made use of this right, but we endure all things, in order that we may not cause any hindrance to the gospel of Christ. 
13 Do you not know that those performing the holy services eat the things from the temple, and those attending to the altar have a share with the altar? 14 In the same way also the Lord ordered those who proclaim the gospel to live from the gospel. 15 But I have not made use of any of these rights. And I am not writing these things in order that it may be thus with me. For it would be better to me rather to die than for anyone to deprive me of my reason for boasting. 16 For if I proclaim the gospel, it is not to me a reason for boasting, for necessity is imposed on me. For woe is to me if I do not proclaim the gospel. 17 For if I do this voluntarily, I have a reward, but if I do so unwillingly, I have been entrusted with a stewardship. 18 What then is my reward? That when I﻿* proclaim the gospel, I may offer the gospel free of charge, in order not to make full use of my right in the gospel. 
19 For although I﻿* am free from all people, I have enslaved myself to all, in order that I may gain more. 20 I have become like a Jew to the Jews, in order that I may gain the Jews. To those under the law I became as under the law (although I﻿* myself am not under the law) in order that I may gain those under the law. 21 To those outside the law I became as outside the law (although I﻿* am not outside the law of God, but subject to the law of Christ) in order that I may gain those outside the law. 22 To the weak I became weak, in order that I may gain the weak. I have become all things to all people, in order that by all means I may save some. 23 I do all this for the sake of the gospel, in order that I may become a participant with it. 
24 Do you not know that those who run in the stadium all run, but one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may win. 25 And everyone who competes exercises self-control in all things. Thus those do so in order that they may receive a perishable crown, but we an imperishable one. 26 Therefore I run in this way, not as running aimlessly; I box in this way, not as beating the air. 27 But I discipline my body and subjugate it, lest somehow after﻿* preaching to others, I myself should become disqualified. 
A History Lesson from Israel
10 For I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud and all went through the sea, 2 and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, 3 and all ate the same spiritual food, 4 and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they drank from the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ. 5 But God was not pleased with the majority of them, for they were struck down in the desert. 
6 Now these things happened as examples for us, so that we should not be desirers of evil things, just as those also desired them, 7 and not become idolaters, as some of them did, just as it is written, “The people sat down to eat and drink, and stood up to play,” 8 nor commit sexual immorality, as some of them committed sexual immorality, and twenty-three thousand fell in one day, 9 nor put Christ to the test, as some of them tested him, and were destroyed by snakes, 10 nor grumble, just as some of them grumbled, and were destroyed by the destroyer. 11 Now these things happened to those people as an example, but are written for our instruction, on whom the ends of the ages have come. 12 Therefore, the one who thinks that he stands must watch out lest he fall. 13 Temptation has not come upon you except what is common to humanity. But God is faithful, who will not permit you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but will also make a way out together with the temptation, so that you may be able to endure it. 
Warning Against Idolatry
14 Therefore, my dear friends, flee from idolatry. 15 I am speaking as to sensible people; you judge what I am saying. 16 The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a participation in the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not a participation in the body of Christ? 17 Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all share from the one bread. 18 Consider Israel according to the flesh: are not the ones who eat the sacrifices sharers in the altar? 19 Therefore, what am I saying? That food sacrificed to idols is anything, or that an idol is anything? 20 No, but that the things which they sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God, and I do not want you to become sharers with demons. 21 You are not able to drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You are not able to share the table of the Lord and the table of demons. 22 Or are we attempting to provoke the Lord to jealousy? We are not stronger than he is, are we?* 
Freedom in Christ
23 All things are permitted, but not all things are profitable. All things are permitted, but not all things build up. 24 Let no one seek ⌊his own good⌋ but the good of the other. 25 Eat everything that is sold in the meat market, ⌊asking no questions⌋ for the sake of the conscience, 26 for “the earth is the Lord’s, and its fullness.” 27 If any of the unbelievers invites you, and you want to go, eat everything that is set before you, ⌊asking no questions⌋ for the sake of the conscience. 28 But if someone says to you, “This is offered to idols,” do not eat it, for the sake of that one who informed you and the conscience. 29 Now I am not speaking about your own conscience, but the conscience of the other person. For why is my freedom judged by another’s conscience? 30 If I partake with thankfulness, why am I slandered concerning that for which I give thanks? 
31 Therefore, whether you eat or you drink or whatever you do, do all things for the glory of God. 32 ⌊Give no offense⌋ both to Jews and to Greeks and to the church of God, 33 just as I also please all people in all things, not seeking my own benefit, but the benefit of the many, in order that they may be saved. 
Concerning Head Coverings in Worship
11 Become imitators of me, just as I also am of Christ. 
2 Now I praise you that you remember me in all things, and just as I handed over to you the traditions, you hold fast to them. 3 But I want you to know that Christ is the head of every man, and the man is the head of the woman, and the head of Christ is God. 4 Every man who prays or prophesies while﻿* having something﻿* on his head dishonors his head, 5 but every woman who prays or prophesies with uncovered head dishonors her head, for she is one and the same with the one whose head is shaved. 6 For if a woman does not cover herself, let her hair be shorn off. But if it is shameful for a woman to have her head shorn or shaved, let her cover her head. 7 For indeed a man ought not to cover his head, because he﻿* is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man. 8 For man is not from woman, but woman from man. 9 For indeed man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man. 10 Because of this, the woman ought to have a symbol of authority on her head, on account of the angels. 11 Nevertheless, neither is woman anything apart from man, nor is man anything apart from woman in the Lord. 12 For just as the woman is from the man, thus also the man is through the woman. But all things are from God. 13 You judge ⌊for yourselves⌋: is it fitting for a woman to pray to God with her head﻿* uncovered? 14 And does not nature itself teach you that a man, if he wears long hair, it is a dishonor to him? 15 But a woman, if she wears long hair, it is her glory, because her hair is given for a covering. 16 But if anyone is disposed to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor do the churches of God. 
Improper Conduct at the Lord’s Supper
17 But in giving this instruction I do not praise you, because you come together not for the better but for the worse. 18 For in the first place, when you﻿* come together as a church, I hear there are divisions among you, and in part I believe it. 19 For indeed it is necessary that there be factions among you, in order that those who are approved may become evident among you. 20 Therefore, when﻿* you come together in the same place, it is not to eat the Lord’s supper. 21 For when you﻿* eat it, each one of you goes ahead to take his own supper, and one is hungry and another is drunk. 22 For do you not have houses for eating and drinking? Or do you despise the church of God and humiliate those who do not have anything? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you? In this I will not praise you! 
23 For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you, that the Lord Jesus, on the night in which he was betrayed, took bread, 24 and after he﻿* had given thanks, he broke it and said, “This is my body which is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” 25 Likewise also the cup, after they had eaten, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.” 26 For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until he comes. 27 So then, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord. 28 But let a person examine himself, and in this way let him eat from the bread and let him drink from the cup. 29 For the one who eats and drinks, if he﻿* does not recognize the body, eats and drinks judgment against himself. 30 Because of this, many are weak and sick among you, and quite a few ⌊have died⌋. 31 But if we were evaluating ourselves, we would not be judged. 32 But if we﻿* are judged by the Lord, we are being disciplined, in order that we will not be condemned with the world. 
33 So then, my brothers, when you﻿* come together in order to eat the Lord’s supper,* wait for one another. 34 If anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, lest you come together for judgment. And I will give directions about the remaining matters whenever I come. 
Varieties of Spiritual Gifts
12 Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be ignorant. 2 You know that when you were pagans, you were led astray to the speechless idols, however you were led. 3 Therefore I make known to you that no one speaking by the Spirit of God says, “Jesus is accursed,” and no one is able to say “Jesus is Lord” except by the Holy Spirit. 
4 Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit, 5 and there are varieties of ministries, and the same Lord, 6 and there are varieties of activities, but the same God, who works all things in all people. 7 But to each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit for what is beneficial to all. 8 For to one is given a word of wisdom through the Spirit, and to another a word of knowledge by the same Spirit, 9 to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit, 10 to another ⌊miraculous powers⌋, to another prophecy, to another distinguishing of spirits, to another kinds of tongues, to another interpretation of tongues. 11 But in all these things one and the same Spirit is at work, distributing to each one individually just as he wishes. 
Unity in the Midst of Diversity
12 For just as the body is one and has many members, but all the members of the body, although they﻿* are many, are one body, thus also Christ. 13 For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free persons, and all were made to drink one Spirit. 14 For the body is not one member, but many. 15 If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am not a part of the body,” not because of this is it not a part of the body. 16 And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I am not a part of the body, not because of this is it not a part of the body. 17 If the whole body were an eye, where would the hearing be? If the whole were hearing, where would the sense of smell be? 18 But now God has placed the members, each one of them, in the body just as he wanted. 19 And if they all were one member, where would the body be? 20 But now there are many members, but one body. 
21 Now the eye is not able to say to the hand, “I do not have need of you,” or again, the head to the feet, “I do not have need of you.” 22 But by much more the members of the body which are thought to be weaker are necessary, 23 and the parts of the body which we think to be less honorable, these we clothe with more abundant honor, and our unpresentable parts come to have more abundant presentability, 24 but our presentable parts do not have need of this. Yet God composed the body by giving more abundant honor to the part which lacked it, 25 in order that there not be a division in the body, but the members would have the same concern for one another. 26 And if one member suffers, all the members suffer together; if a member is honored, all the members rejoice with it. 
27 Now you are the body of Christ, and members ⌊of it individually⌋, 28 and whom God has appointed in the church: first, apostles, second, prophets, third, teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, administrations, kinds of tongues. 29 Not all are apostles, are they?* Not all are prophets, are they?* Not all are teachers, are they?* Not all are workers of miracles, are they?* 30 Not all have gifts of healing, do they?* Not all speak with tongues, do they?* Not all interpret, do they?* 31 But strive for the greater gifts. And I will show you a still more excellent way. 
Love, the More Excellent Way
13 If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but do not have love, I have become a ringing brass gong or a clashing cymbal. 2 And if I have the gift of prophecy and I know all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so that I can remove mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. 3 And if I parcel out all my possessions, and if I hand over my body in order that I will be burned, but do not have love, it benefits me nothing. 
4 Love is patient, love is kind, love is not jealous, it does not boast, it does not become conceited, 5 it does not behave dishonorably, it ⌊is not selfish⌋, it does not become angry, it does not keep a record of wrongs, 6 it does not rejoice at unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth, 7 bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. 
8 Love never ends. But if there are prophecies, they will pass away. If there are tongues, they will cease. If there is knowledge, it will pass away. 9 For we know in part and we prophesy in part, 10 but whenever the perfect comes, the partial will pass away. 11 When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I set aside the things of a child. 12 For now we see through a mirror ⌊indirectly⌋, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know completely, just as I have also been completely known. 13 And now these three things remain: faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love. 
Appropriate Use of Prophecy and Tongues
14 Pursue love, and strive for spiritual gifts, but especially that you may prophesy. 2 For the one who speaks in a tongue does not speak to people but to God, because no one understands, but by the Spirit he speaks mysteries. 3 But the one who prophesies speaks to people edification and encouragement and consolation. 4 The one who speaks in a tongue edifies himself, but the one who prophesies edifies the church. 5 Now I want you all to speak with tongues, but even more that you may prophesy. The one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks with tongues, unless he interprets, in order that the church may receive edification. 
6 But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking with tongues, how do I benefit you, unless I speak to you either with a revelation or with knowledge or with a prophecy or with a teaching? 7 Likewise, the inanimate things which produce a sound, whether flute or lyre, if they do not produce a distinction in the tones, how will it be known what is played on the flute or on the lyre? 8 For indeed, if the trumpet produces an indistinct sound, who will prepare for battle? 9 And so you through the tongue, unless you produce a clear message, how will it be known what is spoken? For you will be speaking into the air. 10 There are probably so many kinds of languages in the world, and none without meaning. 11 Therefore, if I do not know the meaning of the language, I will be a barbarian to the one who is speaking, and the one who is speaking will be a barbarian in my judgment. 12 In this way also you, since you are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek for the edification of the church, in order that you may abound. 
13 Therefore the one who speaks in a tongue must pray that he may interpret. 14 For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays but my mind is unproductive. 15 ⌊Therefore what should I do⌋? I will pray with my spirit, but I will also pray with my mind. I will sing praise with my spirit, but I will also sing praise with my mind. 16 For otherwise, if you praise in your spirit, how will the one who fills the place of the outsider say the “amen” at your thanksgiving, because he does not know what you are saying? 17 For indeed you are giving thanks well, but the other person is not edified. 18 I give thanks to God that I speak with tongues more than all of you, 19 but in the church I prefer to speak five words with my mind, in order that I may instruct other people, than ten thousand words in a tongue. 
20 Brothers, do not become children in your understanding, but with respect to wickedness be as a child, and in your understanding be mature. 21 In the law it is written: 
“By those who speak a foreign language 
and by the lips of others 
I will speak to this people, 
and not even in this way will they obey me,” 
says the Lord. 22 So then, tongues are for a sign not to those who believe, but to unbelievers, but prophecy is not for unbelievers, but for those who believe. 23 Therefore, if the whole church comes together at the same time and all speak with tongues, and outsiders or unbelievers enter, will they not say that you are out of your minds? 24 But if all prophesy, and some unbeliever or outsider enters, he is convicted by all, he is judged by all, 25 the secret things of his heart become evident, and so, falling on his face, he will worship God, proclaiming, “God is truly among you!” 
Specific Instructions for Orderly Worship Services
26 ⌊Therefore what should you do⌋, brothers? Whenever you come together, each one of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a revelation, has a tongue, has an interpretation. All things must be done for edification. 27 If anyone speaks in a tongue, it must be on one occasion two or at most three, and ⌊one after the other⌋, and one must interpret. 28 But if there is no interpreter, he must be silent in the church, but let him speak to himself and to God. 29 Let two or three prophets speak, and the others evaluate. 30 And if something is revealed to another who is seated, the first must be silent. 31 For you are all able to prophesy ⌊in turn⌋, in order that all may learn and all may be encouraged, 32 and the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets. 33 For God is not a God of disorder but of peace. 
As in all the churches of the saints, 34 the women must be silent in the churches, for it is not permitted for them to speak, but they must be in submission, just as the law also says. 35 But if they want to learn something, let them ask their own husbands at home, for it is shameful for a woman to speak in church. 36 Or has the word of God gone out from you, or has it come to you only? 
37 If anyone thinks he is a prophet or spiritual, he should recognize that the things which I am writing to you are of the Lord. 38 But if anyone ignores this, he is ignored. 39 So then, my brothers, desire to prophesy, and do not prevent speaking with tongues. 40 But let all things be done decently and according to proper procedure. 
Paul’s Gospel and the Resurrection of Christ
15 Now I make known to you, brothers, the gospel which I proclaimed to you, which you have also received, in which you also stand, 2 by which you are also being saved, if you hold fast to the message I proclaimed to you, unless you believed to no purpose. 3 For I passed on to you ⌊as of first importance⌋ what I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures, 4 and that he was buried, and that he was raised up on the third day according to the scriptures, 5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve, 6 then he appeared to more than five hundred brothers at once, the majority of whom remain until now, but some have fallen asleep. 7 Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles, 8 and last of all, as it were to one born at the wrong time, he appeared also to me. 9 For I am the least of the apostles, not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. 10 But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace to me has not been in vain, but I labored even more than all of them, and not I, but the grace of God with me. 11 Therefore whether I or those, in this way we preached, and in this way you believed. 
Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead
12 Now if Christ is preached as raised up from the dead, how do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? 13 But if there is no resurrection of the dead, Christ has not been raised either. 14 But if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain, and your faith is in vain. 15 And also we are found to be false witnesses of God, because we testified against God that he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if after all, then, the dead are not raised. 16 For if the dead are not raised, Christ has not been raised either. 17 But if Christ has not been raised, your faith is empty; you are still in your sins. 18 And as a further result, those who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. 19 If ⌊we have put our hope⌋ in Christ in this life only, we are of all people most pitiable. 
20 But now Christ has been raised from the dead, the first fruits of those who have fallen asleep. 21 For since through a man came death, also through a man came the resurrection of the dead. 22 For just as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive. 23 But each in his own group: Christ the first fruits, then those who are Christ’s at his coming, 24 then the end, when he hands over the kingdom to the God and Father, when he has abolished all rule and all authority and power. 25 For it is necessary for him to reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. 26 The last enemy to be abolished is death. 27 For “he subjected all things under his feet.” But when it says “all things” are subjected, it is clear that the one who subjected all things to him is not included. 28 But whenever all things are subjected to him, then the Son himself will be subjected to the one who subjected all things to him, in order that God may be all in all. 
29 Otherwise, why do they do it, those who are being baptized on behalf of the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why indeed are they being baptized on behalf of them? 30 And why are we in danger every hour? 31 I die every day—yes indeed, by my boasting in you, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord! 32 If according to a human perspective I fought wild beasts at Ephesus, what benefit is it to me? If the dead are not raised, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. 33 Do not be deceived! “Bad company corrupts good morals.” 34 Sober up correctly and ⌊stop sinning⌋, for some have no knowledge of God—I say this to your shame. 
Questions Concerning the Resurrection Body
35 But someone will say, “How are the dead raised? And with what sort of body do they come?” 36 Foolish person! What you sow does not come to life unless it dies. 37 And what you sow is not the body which it will become, but you sow the bare seed, whether perhaps of wheat or of some of the rest. 38 But God gives to it a body just as he wishes, and to each one of the seeds its own body. 39 Not all flesh is the same, but there is one flesh of human beings, and another flesh of animals, and another flesh of birds, and another of fish, 40 and heavenly bodies and earthly bodies. But the glory of the heavenly bodies is of one kind, and the glory of the earthly bodies is of another kind. 41 There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars, for star differs from star in glory. 
42 Thus also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruptibility. 43 It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. 44 It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body. 45 Thus also it is written, “The first man, Adam, became a living soul”; the last Adam became a life-giving spirit. 46 But the spiritual is not first, but the natural; then the spiritual. 47 The first man is from the earth, made of earth; the second man is from heaven. 48 As the one who is made of earth, so also are those who are made of earth, and as the heavenly, so also are those who are heavenly. 49 And just as we have borne the image of the one who is made of earth, we will also bear the image of the heavenly. 
50 But I say this, brothers, that flesh and blood is not able to inherit the kingdom of God, nor can corruption inherit incorruptibility. 51 Behold, I tell you a mystery: we will not all fall asleep, but we will all be changed, 52 in a moment, in the blink of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed. 53 For it is necessary for this perishable body to put on incorruptibility, and this mortal body to put on immortality. 54 But whenever this perishable body puts on incorruptibility and this mortal body puts on immortality, then the saying that is written will take place: 
“Death is swallowed up in victory. 
55 Where, O death, is your victory? 
Where, O death, is your sting? 
56 Now the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. 57 But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ! 58 So then, my dear brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, because you﻿* know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 
Concerning the Collection for the Saints
16 Now concerning the collection for the saints: just as I gave directions about it to the churches of Galatia, so you do also. 2 On the first day of the week, each one of you ⌊put aside⌋ something, saving up ⌊to whatever extent he has prospered⌋, in order that whenever I come, at that time collections do not take place. 3 And whenever I arrive, whomever you approve by letters, I will send these to take your gift to Jerusalem. 4 And if it is worthwhile for me to go also, they will travel with me. 
Travel Plans for Paul and Associates
5 But I will come to you whenever I go through Macedonia (for I am going through Macedonia), 6 and perhaps I will stay with you, or even spend the winter, so that you may send me on my way wherever I may go. 7 For I do not want to see you now in passing, for I hope to remain some time with you, if the Lord allows it. 8 But I will remain in Ephesus until Pentecost, 9 for a great and effective door has opened for me, and there are many opponents. 
10 But if Timothy comes, see that he is with you without cause to fear, for he is carrying out the Lord’s work, as I also am. 11 Therefore do not let anyone disdain him, but send him on his way in peace in order that he may come to me, for I am expecting him with the brothers. 
12 Now concerning Apollos our brother, I urged him many times that he should come to you with the brothers, and he was not at all willing that he should come now, but he will come whenever he has an opportunity. 
Concluding Exhortations
13 Be on the alert, stand firm in the faith, act courageously, be strong. 14 All your actions must be done in love. 
15 Now I urge you, brothers—you know about the household of Stephanas, that they are the first fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the ministry for the saints—16 that you also be subject to such people, and to all those who work together and labor. 17 Now I rejoice over the arrival of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because these make up for your absence, 18 for they have refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore recognize such people. 
Final Greetings and Benediction
19 The churches of the province of Asia greet you. Aquila and Prisca greet you in the Lord many times, together with the church in their house. 20 All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a holy kiss. 
21 The greeting is by my hand—Paul’s. 22 If anyone does not love the Lord, let him be accursed. O Lord, come! 
23 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you. 24 My love be with all of you in Christ Jesus.

THE SECOND LETTER OF PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the church of God that is in Corinth, together with all the saints who are in all Achaia. 2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Thanksgiving for God’s Compassion and Comfort
3 Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, 4 who comforts us in all our affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in all affliction with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God. 5 For just as the sufferings of Christ overflow to us, thus through Christ our comfort overflows also. 6 But if we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation; if we are comforted, it is for your comfort that is at work in the patient endurance of the same sufferings that we also suffer. 7 And our hope for you is firm, because we﻿* know that as you are sharers in the sufferings, so also you will be sharers in the comfort. 
8 For we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, concerning our affliction that happened in the province of Asia, that we were burdened to an extraordinary degree, beyond our strength, so that we were in despair even of living. 9 But we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, so that we would not be putting confidence in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead, 10 who delivered us from so great a risk of death, and will deliver us, in whom we have put our hope that he will also deliver us again, 11 while﻿* you also join in helping ⌊on our behalf⌋ by prayer, so that thanks may be given ⌊on our behalf⌋ by many persons for this gracious gift given to us through the help of many. 
Paul’s Clear Conscience
12 For our reason for boasting is this: the testimony of our conscience that we conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, in holiness and purity of motive from God, not in merely human wisdom, but by the grace of God. 13 For we are not writing anything else to you except what you can read or also understand. But I hope that you will understand ⌊completely⌋, 14 just as you have also understood us in part, that we are your reason for boasting, just as you are also ours in the day of our Lord Jesus. 
Paul Delays His Visit to Corinth
15 And with this confidence, I was wanting to come to you previously, in order that you may have a second proof of my goodwill, 16 and through you to go to Macedonia, and to come to you again from Macedonia, and to be sent on my way by you to Judea. 17 Therefore, when I﻿* was wanting to do this, perhaps then was I making use of vacillation? Or was I deciding what I was deciding according to the flesh, in order that with me my “yes” may be “yes” and my “no” may be “no” at the same time?* 18 But God is faithful, so that our word to you is not “yes” and “no.” 19 For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, the one who was proclaimed among you by us, by me and Silvanus and Timothy, did not become “yes” and “no,” but has become “yes” in him. 20 For as many as are the promises of God, in him they are “yes”; therefore also through him is the “amen” to the glory of God through us. 21 Now the one who establishes us together with you in Christ and who anoints us is God, 22 who also sealed us and gave the down payment of the Spirit in our hearts. 
23 But I call upon God as witness against my life, that in order to﻿* spare you, I did not come again to Corinth. 24 Not that we lord it over your faith, but we are fellow workers for your joy, because by faith you stand firm. 
2 For I have decided this for myself, not to come to you again in sorrow. 2 For if I cause you sorrow, then who will make me glad except the one who is caused to be sad by me? 3 And I wrote this very thing in order that when I﻿* came, I would not experience sorrow from those who ought to have made me glad, because I﻿* have confidence about you all, that my joy ⌊belongs to all of you⌋. 4 For out of great distress and anguish of heart I wrote to you through many tears, not so that you may be caused to be sad, but so that you may know the love that I have especially for you. 
Forgive and Comfort the Offender
5 But if anyone has caused sorrow, he has not caused me sorrow, but ⌊to some degree⌋—⌊in order not to say too much⌋—to all of you. 6 This punishment by the majority is sufficient for such a person. 7 So then, you should rather forgive and comfort him, lest somehow this person should be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow. 8 Therefore I urge you to confirm your love for him. 9 Because for this reason also I wrote, in order that I could know your proven character, whether you are obedient in everything. 10 Now to whomever you forgive anything, I also do; for indeed, whatever I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, it is ⌊for your sake⌋ in the presence of Christ, 11 in order that we may not be exploited by Satan (for we are not ignorant of his schemes). 
Triumphant Ministry in Christ
12 Now when I﻿* arrived in Troas for the gospel of Christ and a door was opened for me by the Lord, 13 I did not experience rest in my spirit, because I did not find Titus my brother, but saying farewell to them, I departed for Macedonia. 14 But thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumphal procession in Christ, and who reveals the fragrance of the knowledge of him through us in every place. 15 For we are the aroma of Christ to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing, 16 to those on the one hand an odor from death to death, and to those on the other hand a fragrance from life to life. And who is qualified for these things? 17 For we are not like the majority who peddle the word of God, but as from pure motives—but as from God—we speak before God in Christ. 
New Covenant Ministry
3 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we, like some, need letters of recommendation to you or from you? 2 You are our letter, inscribed on our hearts, known and read by all people, 3 revealing that you are a letter of Christ, delivered by us, inscribed not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on stone tablets but on tablets of human hearts. 
4 Now we possess such confidence through Christ toward God. 5 Not that we are adequate in ourselves to consider anything as from ourselves, but our adequacy is from God, 6 who also makes us adequate as servants of a new covenant, not of the letter, but of the Spirit, for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. 
7 But if the ministry of death in letters carved on stone came with glory, so that the sons of Israel were not able to look intently into the face of Moses because of the glory of his face, which was transitory, 8 how will the ministry of the Spirit not be even more with glory? 9 For if there was glory in the ministry of condemnation, by much more will the ministry of righteousness overflow with glory. 10 For indeed what had been glorified has not been glorified in this case, on account of the glory that surpasses it. 11 For if what was transitory came with glory, by much more what remains is with glory. 
12 Therefore, because we﻿* have such a hope, we use much boldness, 13 and not as Moses used to place a veil over his face, in order that the sons of Israel would not stare at the end of what was transitory. 14 But their minds were hardened. For until this very day, the same veil remains upon the reading of the old covenant, not being uncovered, because it is done away with in Christ. 15 But until today, whenever Moses is read aloud, a veil lies upon their heart, 16 but whenever one turns to the Lord, the veil is removed. 17 Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. 18 And we all, with unveiled face, reflecting the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from glory into glory, just as from the Lord, the Spirit. 
Proclaiming Jesus Christ as Lord
4 Because of this, since we﻿* have this ministry, just as we have been shown mercy, we do not lose heart, 2 but we have renounced shameful hidden things, not behaving with craftiness or adulterating the word of God, but with the open proclamation of the truth commending ourselves to every person’s conscience before God. 3 But if indeed our gospel is veiled, it is veiled among those who are perishing, 4 among whom the god of this age has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that they would not see the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God. 5 For we do not proclaim ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your slaves for the sake of Jesus. 6 For God who said, “Light will shine out of darkness,” is the one who has shined in our hearts for the enlightenment of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ. 
Treasure in Earthenware Jars
7 But we have this treasure in earthenware jars, in order that the extraordinary degree of the power may be from God and not from us. 8 We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not despairing; 9 persecuted, but not abandoned; struck down, but not destroyed; 10 always carrying around the death of Jesus in our body, in order that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body. 11 For we who are alive are continually being handed over to death because of Jesus, in order that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our mortal flesh. 12 So then, death is at work in us, but life in you. 13 But because we﻿* have the same spirit of faith in accordance with what is written, “I believed, therefore I spoke,” we also believe, therefore we also speak, 14 because we﻿* know that the one who raised Jesus will also raise us together with Jesus and present us together with you. 15 For all these things ⌊are for your sake⌋, in order that the grace that is increasing through the many may cause thanksgiving to abound to the glory of God. 
16 Therefore we do not lose heart, but even if our outer person is being destroyed, yet our inner person is being renewed day after day. 17 For our momentary light affliction is producing in us an eternal weight of glory ⌊beyond all measure and proportion⌋, 18 because﻿* we are not looking at what is seen, but what is not seen. For what is seen is temporary, but what is not seen is eternal. 
Absent from the Body and at Home with the Lord
5 For we know that if our earthly house, the tent, is destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made by hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 For indeed, in this house we groan, because we﻿* desire to put on our dwelling from heaven, 3 if indeed, even after we﻿* have taken it off, we will not be found naked. 4 For indeed we who are in this tent groan, being burdened ⌊for this reason, that⌋ we do not want to be unclothed, but to be clothed, in order that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. 5 Now the one who has prepared us for this very thing is God, who has given us the down payment, the Spirit. 
6 Therefore, although we are﻿* always confident and know that while we﻿* are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord—7 for we live by faith, not by sight—8 so we are confident and prefer rather to be absent from the body and to be at home with the Lord. 9 Therefore indeed we have as our ambition, whether at home in the body or absent from the body, to be acceptable to him. 10 For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, in order that each one may receive back the things through the body according to what he has done, whether good or bad. 
Controlled by the Love of Christ
11 Therefore, because we﻿* know the fear of the Lord, we are attempting to persuade people, but we are revealed to God, and I hope to be revealed in your consciences. 12 We are not commending ourselves to you again, but are giving you an opportunity to boast about us, in order that you may have an answer for those who boast in appearance and not in heart. 13 For if we are out of our senses, it is for God; if we are of sound mind, it is for you. 14 For the love of Christ controls us, because we﻿* have concluded this: that one died for all; as a result all died. 15 And he died for all, in order that those who live should no longer live for themselves, but for the one who died for them and was raised. 
16 So then, from now on we know no one ⌊from a human point of view⌋, if indeed we have known Christ ⌊from a human point of view⌋, but now we know him this way no longer. 17 Therefore if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold, new things have come. 18 And all these things are from God, who has reconciled us to himself through Christ, and who has given us the ministry of reconciliation, 19 namely, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses against them, and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation. 20 Therefore we are ambassadors on behalf of Christ, as if﻿* God were imploring you through us. We beg you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God. 21 He made the one who did not know sin to be sin on our behalf, in order that we could become the righteousness of God in him. 
Afflictions of God’s Servants
6 Now because we﻿* are fellow workers, we also urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain. 2 For he says, 
“At the acceptable time I heard you, 
and in the day of salvation I helped you.” 
Behold, now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation! 3 We are giving no one an occasion for taking offense in anything, in order that our ministry will not have fault found with it, 4 but commending ourselves as servants of God in every way, in much endurance, in afflictions, in distresses, in difficulties, 5 in beatings, in prisons, in disturbances, in troubles, in sleepless nights, in going hungry, 6 in purity, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love without hypocrisy, 7 in the word of truth, in the power of God, with the weapons of righteousness for the right hand and left hand, 8 through glory and dishonor, through slander and good repute, regarded as deceivers and yet truthful, 9 as unknown and yet known completely, as dying, and behold, we go on living, as disciplined, and yet not put to death, 10 as grieving, but always rejoicing, as poor, but making many rich, as having nothing, and possessing everything. 
11 ⌊We have spoken freely and openly⌋ to you, Corinthians; our heart is open wide. 12 You are not restricted by us, but you are restricted in your affections. 13 Now the same way in exchange (I am speaking as to children), you open wide your hearts also. 
Do Not Become Unevenly Yoked with Unbelievers
14 Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers, for what participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? Or what fellowship does light have with darkness? 15 And what agreement does Christ have with Beliar? Or what share does a believer have with an unbeliever? 16 And what agreement does the temple of God have with idols? For we are the temple of the living God, just as God said, 
“I will live in them and will walk about among them, 
and I will be their God and they will be my people.” 
17 Therefore “come out from their midst 
and be separate,” says the Lord, 
“and do not touch what is unclean, 
and I will welcome you, 
18 and I will be a father to you, 
and you will be sons and daughters to me,” 
says the all-powerful Lord. 
Paul’s Joy at the Corinthians’ Repentance
7 Therefore since we﻿* have these promises, dear friends, let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of body and spirit, accomplishing holiness in the fear of God. 2 ⌊Make room for us in your hearts⌋. We have wronged no one, we have ruined no one, we have defrauded no one. 3 I do not say this ⌊to condemn you⌋, because I have already said that you are in our hearts, so that we die together and we live together. 4 Great is my confidence toward you; great is my boasting on your behalf; I am filled with encouragement; I am overflowing with joy in all our affliction. 
5 For even when﻿* we arrived in Macedonia, our body had no rest, but we were afflicted in every way—quarrels outside, fears within. 6 But God, who comforts the humble, comforted us by the coming of Titus, 7 and not only by his coming, but also by the comfort with which he was comforted among you, because he﻿* reported to us your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced even more. 8 For if indeed I grieved you by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I did regret it (I see that that letter grieved you, even though for ⌊a short time⌋), 9 now I rejoice, not that you were grieved, but that you were grieved to repentance. For you were grieved according to the will of God, so that you suffered loss in no way through us. 10 For grief according to the will of God brings about a repentance leading to salvation, not to be regretted, but worldly grief brings about death. 11 For behold how much diligence this very thing, being grieved according to the will of God, has brought about in you: what defense of yourselves, what indignation, what fear, what longing, what zeal, what punishment! In everything you have demonstrated yourselves to be innocent in this matter. 12 Consequently, even if I wrote to you, it was not because of the one who did wrong or because of the one who had been wronged, but in order that your diligence ⌊on our behalf⌋ might be revealed to you before God. 13 Because of this we have been encouraged, and in addition to our encouragement, we rejoiced much more over the joy of Titus, because his spirit had been refreshed by all of you. 14 For if I have boasted anything to him about you, I have not been put to shame, but as I have spoken everything to you in truth, thus also our boasting to Titus ⌊has proven to be true⌋. 15 And his affection for you is all the more when he﻿* remembers the obedience of all of you as you welcomed him with fear and trembling. 16 I rejoice, because in everything I am completely confident in you. 
Generosity in Giving
8 Now we make known to you, brothers, the grace of God that has been given among the churches of Macedonia, 2 that with a great ordeal of affliction, the abundance of their joy and the extreme depth of their poverty have overflowed to the wealth of their generosity. 3 I testify that they gave﻿* according to their ability, and beyond their ability, by their own choice, 4 requesting of us with much exhortation the favor and the fellowship of the ministry to the saints, 5 and not just as we had hoped, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us, by the will of God. 6 So we urged Titus that, just as he had previously begun it, thus he would also complete for you this act of grace. 7 But just as you excel in everything—in faith and in speaking and in knowledge and with all diligence and in the love from us that is in you—so may you excel in this grace also. 8 I am not saying this as a command, but proving the genuineness of your love by means of the diligence of others. 9 For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he﻿* was rich, for your sake he became poor, in order that you, by his poverty, may become rich. 10 And I am giving an opinion in this matter, because this is profitable for you who not only began previously, a year ago, to do something, but also to want to do it. 11 So now also complete the doing of it, in order that just as you have the eagerness to want to do it, thus also you may complete it from what you have. 12 For if the eagerness is present ⌊according to what one has⌋, it is acceptable not ⌊according to what one does not have⌋. 13 For this is not that for others there may be relief, and for you difficult circumstances, but as a matter of equality. 14 At the present time your abundance will be for their need, in order that their abundance may also be for your need, so that there may be equality, 15 just as it is written, “The one who gathered much did not have too much, and the one who gathered little did not have too little.” 
Arrangements for Administering the Corinthians’ Gift
16 But thanks be to God, who has put in the heart of Titus the same devotion ⌊on your behalf⌋, 17 because he not only welcomed our request, but being very earnest, by his own choice he went out﻿* to you. 18 And we have sent at the same time with him the brother whose praise in the gospel has become known throughout all the churches. 19 And not only this, but he was also chosen by the churches as our traveling companion together with this gift that is being administered by us to the glory of the Lord himself and to show our readiness to help. 20 We are trying to avoid this, lest anyone should find fault with us in this abundant gift that is being administered by us. 21 For we are taking into consideration what is honorable not only before the Lord, but also before people. 22 And we are sending with them our brother whom we have tested many times in many things that he is diligent, but now much more diligent because of his great confidence in you. 23 If there is a question concerning Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker for you. If there is a question concerning our brothers, they are messengers of the churches, the glory of Christ. 24 Therefore show to them the proof of your love and our boasting about you ⌊openly before⌋ the churches. 
God Loves a Cheerful Giver
9 For it is unnecessary for me to write to you concerning the ministry to the saints, 2 because I know your readiness to help, concerning which I keep on boasting to the Macedonians about you, that Achaia has been ready to help since last year, and your zeal has stirred up the majority of them. 3 But I am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you would not prove to be empty in this case, so that you may be prepared just as I was saying, 4 lest somehow if Macedonians should come with me and find you unprepared, we—⌊not to speak of you⌋—would be humiliated in connection with this project. 5 Therefore I considered it necessary to urge the brothers that they should go on ahead to you and make arrangements in advance for your generous gift that was promised previously, so this would be prepared as a generous gift and not as grudgingly granted. 
6 Now the point is this: the one who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and the one who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. 7 Each one should give as he has decided in his heart, not ⌊reluctantly⌋ or from compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. 8 And God is able to cause all grace to abound to you, so that in everything at all times, because you﻿* have enough of everything, you may overflow in every good work. 9 Just as it is written, 
“He scattered widely, he gave to the poor; 
his righteousness remains ⌊forever⌋.” 
10 Now the one who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will provide and multiply your seed, and will cause the harvest of your righteousness to grow, 11 being made rich in every way for all generosity, which is producing through us thanksgiving to God, 12 because the service of this ministry is not only supplying the needs of the saints, but also is overflowing through many expressions of thanksgiving to God. 13 Through the proven character of this service they will glorify God because of the submission of your confession to the gospel of Christ and the generosity of your participation toward them and toward everyone, 14 and they are longing for you in their prayers for you, because of the surpassing grace of God to you. 15 Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift! 
Paul’s Ministry Defended
10 Now I, Paul, appeal to you myself by the humility and gentleness of Christ, who ⌊when I am present in person⌋ am humble among you, but when I﻿* am absent am bold toward you—2 now I ask when I﻿* am present that I will not need to be bold with the confidence with which I propose to show boldness toward some who consider us as behaving according to the flesh. 3 For although we﻿* are living in the flesh, we do not wage war according to the flesh, 4 for the weapons of our warfare are not merely human, but powerful to God for the tearing down of fortresses, tearing down arguments 5 and all pride that is raised up against the knowledge of God, and taking every thought captive to the obedience of Christ. 6 And ⌊we are ready⌋ to punish all disobedience, whenever your obedience is completed. 
7 You are looking at things according to appearance. If anyone is convinced he himself is Christ’s, he should consider this concerning himself again: that just as Christ himself is, so also are we. 8 For even if I boast somewhat more about our authority that the Lord gave us ⌊for building you up and not for tearing you down⌋, I will not be put to shame, 9 so that I do not want to appear as if I were terrifying you by my letters, 10 because it is said, “His letters are severe and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak and his speech is of no account.” 11 Let such a person consider this: that what we are in word by letters when we﻿* are absent, we will also be in ⌊actions⌋ when we﻿* are present. 
12 For we do not dare to classify or to compare ourselves with some who commend themselves, but they themselves, when they measure themselves by themselves and compare themselves with themselves, do not understand. 13 But we will not boast ⌊beyond limits⌋, but according to the measure of the assignment that God has assigned to us as a measure to reach even as far as you. 14 For we are not overextending ourselves, as if we﻿* had not reached you, because we have reached even as far as you with the gospel of Christ, 15 not boasting ⌊beyond limits⌋ in the labors of others, but having hope that as your faith is growing to be enlarged greatly by you according to our assignment, 16 so that we may proclaim the gospel in the regions that lie beyond you, and not boast in the things accomplished in the area assigned to someone else. 17 But “the one who boasts, let him boast in the Lord.” 18 For it is not the one commending himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends. 
Paul Defends His Apostleship
11 I wish that you would put up with me ⌊in something a little foolish⌋—but indeed you are putting up with me. 2 For I am jealous for you with a godly jealousy, because I promised you in marriage to one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ. 3 But I am afraid lest somehow, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craftiness, your minds may be led astray from the sincerity and the purity of devotion to Christ. 4 For if the one who comes proclaims another Jesus whom we have not proclaimed, or you receive a different spirit which you did not receive, or a different gospel which you did not accept, you put up with it well enough! 5 For I consider myself in no way to be inferior to the preeminent apostles. 6 But even if I am unskilled in speech, yet I am not in knowledge; certainly in everything we have made this clear to you in every way. 7 Or did I commit a sin by﻿* humbling myself in order that you may be exalted, because I proclaimed the gospel of God to you without payment? 8 I robbed other churches by﻿* accepting support from them for the ministry to you. 9 And when I﻿* was present with you and was in need, I did not burden anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied my need, and in everything I kept myself from being a burden to you, and will keep myself from being a burden. 10 As the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting ⌊of mine⌋ will not be stopped in the regions of Achaia. 11 ⌊Why⌋? Because I do not love you? God knows I do! 12 But what I am doing, I will also do, in order that I may remove the opportunity of those who want an opportunity, that they may be found just as also we are in what they are boasting about. 13 For such people are false apostles, deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ. 14 And no wonder, for Satan himself disguises himself as an angel of light. 15 Therefore it is not a great thing if his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness, whose end will be according to their deeds. 
Paul Boasts in His Sufferings
16 Again I say, do not let anyone think I am foolish. But indeed, if you do, accept me even as foolish, in order that I also may boast a little. 17 What I am saying in this project of boasting, I am not saying as the Lord would say, but as in foolishness. 18 Since many are boasting according to human standards, I also will boast. 19 For because you﻿* are wise, you put up with foolish people gladly! 20 For you put up with it if someone enslaves you, if someone devours you, if someone takes advantage of you, if someone is presumptious toward you, if someone strikes you in the face. 21 I say this to my shame, namely, that we have been weak. 
But in whatever anyone dares to boast—I am speaking in foolishness—I also dare to boast. 22 Are they Hebrews? I am also! Are they Israelites? I am also! Are they descendants of Abraham? I am also! 23 Are they servants of Christ?—I am speaking as though I were beside myself—I am more so, with far greater labors, with far more imprisonments, with beatings to a much greater degree, in danger of death many times. 24 Five times I received at the hands of the Jews forty lashes less one. 25 Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I received a stoning. Three times I was shipwrecked. A day and a night I have spent in the deep water. 26 I have been on journeys many times, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from robbers, in dangers from my own people, in dangers from the Gentiles, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea, in dangers because of false brothers, 27 with toil and hardship, often in sleepless nights, with hunger and thirst, often going hungry, in cold and poorly clothed. 28 Apart from these external things, there is the pressure on me every day of the anxiety about all the churches. 29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is caused to sin, and I do not burn with indignation? 30 If it is necessary to boast, I will boast about ⌊the things related to my weakness⌋. 31 The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is blessed ⌊forever⌋, knows that I am not lying. 32 In Damascus, the governor under King Aretas was guarding the city of the Damascenes in order to take me into custody, 33 and I was lowered through a window through the wall in a rope-basket, and I escaped his hands. 
A Vision of Paradise
12 It is necessary to boast; it is not profitable, but I will proceed to visions and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know a man in Christ fourteen years ago—whether in the body I do not know, or outside the body I do not know, God knows—such a man was caught up to the third heaven, 3 and I know this man—whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, God knows—4 that he was caught up to paradise and heard words not to be spoken, which it is not permitted for a person to speak. 5 On behalf of such a person I will boast, but on behalf of myself I will not boast, except in my weaknesses. 6 For if I want to boast, I will not be foolish, because I will be telling the truth, but I am refraining, so that no one can credit to me more than what he sees in me or hears anything from me, 7 even because of the extraordinary degree of the revelations. Therefore, so that I would not exalt myself, a thorn in the flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan, in order that it would torment me so that I would not exalt myself. 8 Three times I appealed to the Lord about this, that it would depart from me. 9 And he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, because the power is perfected in weakness.” Therefore rather I will boast most gladly in my weaknesses, in order that the power of Christ may reside in me. 10 Therefore I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in calamities, in persecutions and difficulties for the sake of Christ, for whenever I am weak, then I am strong. 
Paul’s Concern for the Christians at Corinth
11 I have become a fool! You compelled me, for I ought to have been commended by you, for I am in no way inferior to the preeminent apostles, even if I am nothing. 12 Indeed, the signs of an apostle have been done among you with all patient endurance, both signs and wonders and deeds of power. 13 ⌊For in what respect are you made worse off⌋ more than the rest of the churches, except that I myself was not a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong! 14 Behold, this third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a burden to you. For I am not seeking your possessions, but you. For children are not obligated to save up for their parents, but parents for their children. 15 But I will spend and be expended most gladly for your lives. If I love you much more, am I to be loved less? 16 But let it be. I have not been a burden to you, but because I﻿* was crafty, I took you by cunning. 17 I have not taken advantage of you ⌊through anyone whom I sent to you⌋, have I?* 18 I urged Titus to go, and I sent the brother with him. Titus did not take advantage of you, did he?* Did we not conduct ourselves in the same spirit?* Did we not walk in the same footsteps?* 19 Have you been thinking all this time that we are defending ourselves to you? We are speaking in Christ before God, and all these things, dear friends, are for your edification. 20 For I am afraid lest somehow when I﻿* arrive, I will not find you as I want, and I may be found by you as you do not want. I am afraid﻿* lest somehow there will be strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, selfish ambition, slander, gossip, pride, disorder. 21 I am afraid lest when I﻿* come again my God will humiliate me ⌊in your presence⌋, and I will grieve over many of those who sinned previously and have not repented because of their impurity and sexual immorality and licentiousness that they have practiced. 
Final Warnings to the Church at Corinth
13 This is the third time I am coming to you. ⌊By the testimony⌋ of two or three witnesses every word will be established. 2 I have already said when I was present the second time, and although I﻿* am absent now I also say in advance to those who sinned previously and to all the rest, that if I come again I will not spare anyone, 3 since you are demanding proof that Christ, who is not weak toward you, but is powerful among you, is speaking in me. 4 For indeed, he was crucified because of weakness, but he lives because of the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we will live together with him because of the power of God toward you. 
5 Test yourselves to see if you are in the faith. Examine yourselves! Or do you not recognize regarding yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you, unless you are unqualified? 6 And I hope that you will recognize that we are not unqualified! 7 Now we pray to God that you not do wrong in any way, not that we are seen as approved, but that you do what is good, even though we are seen as though unqualified. 8 For we are not able to do anything against the truth, but rather only for the truth. 9 For we rejoice whenever we are weak, but you are strong, and we pray for this: your maturity. 10 Because of this, I am writing these things although I﻿* am absent, in order that when I﻿* am present I may not have to act severely according to the authority that the Lord has given me for building up and not for tearing down. 
Final Greetings and Benediction
11 Finally, brothers, rejoice, be restored, be encouraged, ⌊be in agreement⌋, be at peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you. 12 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the saints greet you. 13 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with all of you.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO THE GALATIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, an apostle not from men nor by men but through Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead, 2 and all the brothers with me, to the churches of Galatia. 3 Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, 4 who gave himself for our sins in order to rescue us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father, 5 to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen. 
A Different Gospel
6 I am astonished that you are turning away so quickly from the one who called you by the grace of Christ to a different gospel, 7 not that there is a different gospel, except there are some who are disturbing you and wanting to distort the gospel of Christ. 8 But even if we or an angel from heaven should proclaim a gospel to you contrary to what we proclaimed to you, let him be accursed! 9 As we said before, and now I say again, if anyone is proclaiming a gospel to you contrary to what you have received, let him be accursed! 10 For am I now making an appeal to people or to God? Or am I seeking to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I would not be a slave of Christ. 
Paul’s Defense of His Apostleship
11 For I make known to you, brothers, the gospel that has been proclaimed by me, that it is not ⌊of human origin⌋. 12 For neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a revelation of Jesus Christ. 13 For you have heard about my former way of life in Judaism, that to an extraordinary degree I was persecuting the church of God, and trying to destroy it, 14 and was progressing in Judaism beyond many contemporaries in my nation, because﻿* I was a far more zealous adherent of the traditions handed down by my forefathers. 
15 But when the one who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by his grace was pleased 16 to reveal his Son in me in order that I would proclaim the gospel about him among the Gentiles, immediately I did not consult with flesh and blood, 17 nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away to Arabia and I returned again to Damascus. 18 Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to become acquainted with Cephas, and I stayed with him fifteen days, 19 but I did not see any others of the apostles except James, the brother of the Lord. 20 (Now the things which I am writing to you, behold, I assure you before God that I am not lying.) 21 Then I came to the regions of Syria and of Cilicia, 22 but I was unknown ⌊in person⌋ to the churches of Judea that are in Christ, 23 and they were only hearing, “The one formerly persecuting us is now proclaiming the faith that formerly he was attempting to destroy,” 24 and they were glorifying God because of me. 
Paul’s Ministry Recognized by the Jerusalem Apostles
2 Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking along Titus also. 2 Now I went up there because of a revelation and laid out to them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles, but in private to the influential people, lest somehow I was running, or had run, in vain. 3 But not even Titus who was with me, although﻿* he was a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised. 4 Now this was because of the false brothers secretly brought in, who slipped in to spy out our freedom that we have in Christ Jesus, in order that they might enslave us, 5 to whom not even for an hour did we yield in subjection, in order that the truth of the gospel might remain continually with you. 6 But from those ⌊who were influential⌋ (whatever they were, it makes no difference to me, ⌊God does not show partiality⌋)—for those who were influential added nothing to me. 7 But these, when they﻿* saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcision, just as Peter to the circumcision 8 (for the one who was at work through Peter for his apostleship to the circumcision was at work also through me for the Gentiles), 9 and when James and Cephas and John—those thought to be pillars—acknowledged the grace given to me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, in order that we should go to the Gentiles and they to the circumcision. 10 They asked only that we should remember the poor, the very thing I was also eager to do. 
Paul Confronts Peter at Antioch
11 But when Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face, because he was condemned. 12 For before certain people came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles, but when they came, he withdrew and separated himself, because he﻿* was afraid of those who were of the circumcision, 13 and the rest of the Jews also joined in this hypocrisy with him, so that even Barnabas was carried away with them in their hypocrisy. 14 But when I saw that they were not being straightforward with the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas in the presence of them all, “If you, although you﻿* are a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you try to compel the Gentiles to live like Jews?” 
Justified by Faith in Christ
15 We are Jews by nature and not sinners from among the Gentiles, 16 but knowing that a person is not justified by the works of the law, if not by faith in Jesus Christ, and we have believed in Christ Jesus so that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the law ⌊no human being will be justified⌋. 17 But if while seeking to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also have been found to be sinners, then is Christ an agent of sin? May it never be! 18 For if I build up again these things which I destroyed, I show myself to be a transgressor. 19 For through the law I died to the law, in order that I might live to God. I have been crucified with Christ, 20 and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me, and that life I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. 21 I do not declare invalid the grace of God, for if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died to no purpose. 
Justified by the Law, or Justified by Faith?
3 O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as having been crucified? 2 I want only to learn this from you: Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? 3 Are you so foolish? Having begun by the Spirit, are you now trying to be made complete by the flesh? 4 Have you suffered so many things for nothing—if indeed also it was for nothing? 5 Therefore does the one who gives you the Spirit and who works miracles among you do so by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? 
6 Just as Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him for righteousness, 7 then understand that the ones ⌊who have faith⌋, these are sons of Abraham. 8 And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, proclaimed the good news in advance to Abraham: “In you all the nations will be blessed.” 9 So then, the ones who have faith are blessed together with Abraham who believed. 10 For as many as are of the works of the law are under a curse, for it is written, “Cursed is everyone who does not abide by all the things that are written in the book of the law to do them.” 11 Now it is clear that no one is justified in the sight of God by the law, because “the one who is righteous will live by faith.” 12 But the law is not from faith, but “the one who does these things will live by them.” 
13 Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by﻿* becoming a curse for us, because it is written, “Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree,” 14 in order that the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. 
The Promise to Abraham and His Descendant
15 Brothers, I am speaking according to a human perspective. Nevertheless, when﻿* the covenant of a man has been ratified, no one declares it invalid or adds additional provisions to it. 16 Now to Abraham and to his descendant the promises were spoken. It does not say, “and to descendants,” as concerning many, but as concerning one, “and to your descendant,” who is Christ. 17 Now I am saying this: the law, that came after four hundred and thirty years, does not revoke a covenant previously ratified by God, in order to nullify the promise. 18 For if the inheritance is from the law, it is no longer from the promise, but God graciously gave it to Abraham through the promise. 
The Addition of the Law
19 Why then the law? It was added on account of transgressions, until the descendant should come to whom it had been promised, having been ordered through angels by the hand of a mediator. 20 Now the mediator is not for one, but God is one. 
21 Therefore is the law opposed to the promises of God? May it never be! For if a law had been given that was able to give life, certainly righteousness would have been from the law. 22 But the scripture imprisoned all under sin, in order that the promise could be given by faith in Jesus Christ to those who believe. 
23 But before faith came, we were detained under the law, imprisoned until the coming faith was revealed. 24 So then, the law became our guardian until Christ, in order that we could be justified by faith. 25 But after﻿* faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian. 26 For you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus, 27 for as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. 28 There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus. 29 And if you are Christ’s, then you are descendants of Abraham, heirs according to the promise. 
No Longer Slaves But Sons and Heirs
4 Now I say, for as long a time as the heir is a child, he is no different from a slave, although he﻿* is master of everything, 2 but he is under guardians and managers until the time set by his father. 3 So also we, when we were children, we were enslaved under the elemental spirits of the world. 4 But when the fullness of time came, God sent out his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, 5 in order that he might redeem those under the law, in order that we might receive the adoption. 6 And because you are sons, God sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying out, “Abba! (Father!),” 7 so that you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a son, also an heir through God. 
Do Not Be Enslaved Again
8 But at that time when you﻿* did not know God, you were enslaved to the things which by nature are not gods. 9 But now, because you have come to know God, or rather have come to be known by God, how can you turn back again to the weak and miserable elemental spirits? Do you want to be enslaved to them all over again? 10 You carefully observe days and months and seasons and years. 11 I am afraid for you, lest perhaps I have labored for you in vain! 12 I ask you, brothers, become like me, because I also have become like you. You have done me no wrong! 
Paul’s Personal Appeal
13 But you know that because of an illness of the flesh I proclaimed the gospel to you the first time. 14 And you did not despise or disdain what was a trial for you in my flesh, but you welcomed me like an angel of God, like Christ Jesus. 15 So where is your blessing? For I testify to you that, if possible, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me! 16 So then, have I become your enemy by﻿* being truthful to you? 17 They zealously seek you, not commendably, but they want to exclude you, in order that you may seek them zealously. 18 But it is good to be sought zealously in good at all times, and not only when I am present with you. 19 My children, for whom I am having birth pains again, until Christ is formed in you! 20 But I could wish to be present with you now, and to change my tone because I am perplexed about you. 
Hagar and Sarah Represent Two Covenants
21 Tell me, you who are wanting to be under the law, do you not understand the law? 22 For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the female slave and one by the free woman. 23 But the one by the female slave was born according to human descent, and the one by the free woman through the promise, 24 which things are spoken allegorically, for these women are two covenants, one from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery, who is Hagar. 25 Now Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is a slave with her children. 26 But the Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother. 27 For it is written, 
“Rejoice, O barren woman, who does not give birth to children; 
burst out and shout, you who do not have birth pains, 
because many are the children of the desolate woman, 
even more than those of the one who has a husband.” 
28 But you, brothers, are children of the promise, just as Isaac. 29 But just as at that time the child born according to human descent persecuted the child born according to the Spirit, so also now. 30 But what does the scripture say? “Drive out the female slave and her son, for the son of the female slave will never inherit with the son” of the free woman. 31 Therefore, brothers, we are not children of the female slave but of the free woman. 
Live in Freedom and Love One Another
5 For freedom Christ has set us free. Stand firm, therefore, and do not be subject again to a yoke of slavery. 2 Look! I, Paul, tell you that if you become circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing! 3 And again I testify to every man who becomes circumcised, that he is under obligation to keep the whole law. 4 You are estranged from Christ, you who are attempting to be justified﻿* by the law; you have fallen from grace. 5 For through the Spirit by faith we eagerly await the hope of righteousness. 6 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love. 
7 You were running well. Who hindered you from obeying the truth? 8 This persuasion is not from the one who calls you! 9 A little leaven leavens the whole batch of dough. 10 I have confidence in you in the Lord that you will think nothing different, but the one who is confusing you ⌊will pay the penalty⌋, whoever he may be. 11 Now, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the stumbling block of the cross has been abolished. 12 I wish that the ones who are disturbing you would also ⌊castrate themselves⌋! 
13 For you were called to freedom, brothers. Only do not let your freedom become an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another. 14 For the whole law is fulfilled in one statement, namely, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” 15 But if you bite and devour one another, watch out that you are not consumed by one another. 
Live by the Spirit and Reject the Deeds of the Flesh
16 But I say, live by the Spirit, and you will never carry out the desire of the flesh. 17 For the flesh desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, for these are in opposition to one another, so that whatever you want, you may not do these things. 18 But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law. 
19 Now the deeds of the flesh are evident, which are sexual immorality, impurity, licentiousness, 20 idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, selfish ambition, dissension, factions, 21 envy, drunkenness, carousing, and things like these, things which I am telling you in advance, just as I said before, that the ones who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God. 22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, 23 gentleness, self control. Against such things there is no law. 24 Now those ⌊who belong to Christ⌋  have crucified the flesh together with its feelings and its desires. 
25 If we live by the Spirit, we must also follow the Spirit. 26 We must not become conceited, provoking one another, envying one another. 
Carry One Another’s Burdens
6 Brothers, even if a person is caught in some trespass, you who are spiritual restore such a person in a spirit of humility, looking out for yourself, lest you also be tempted. 2 Carry the burdens of one another, and so fulfill the law of Christ. 3 For if anyone thinks he is something although he﻿* is nothing, he is deceiving himself. 4 But let each one examine his own work, and then he will have a reason for boasting in himself alone, and not in someone else. 5 For each one will carry his own burden. 
Do Good to All People
6 Now the one who is taught the word must share in all good things with the one who teaches. 7 Do not be deceived: God is not to be mocked, for whatever a person sows, this he will also reap, 8 because the one who sows to his own flesh will reap corruption from the flesh, but the one who sows to the Spirit will reap eternal life from the Spirit. 9 And let us not grow weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap, if we﻿* do not give up. 10 So then, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, and especially to those who belong to the household of faith. 
A Final Warning
11 See with what large letters I am writing to you with my own hand. 12 As many as are wanting to make a good showing in the flesh, these are attempting to compel﻿* you to be circumcised, only so that they will not be persecuted for the cross of Christ. 13 For not even those who are circumcised observe the law themselves, but they want you to be circumcised in order that they may boast in your flesh. 14 But as for me, may it never be that I boast, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world. 15 For neither is circumcision anything nor uncircumcision, but a new creation. 16 And all those who follow this rule, peace and mercy be on them and on the Israel of God. 
Conclusion and Benediction
17 Finally, let no one cause me trouble, for I carry on my body the marks of Jesus. 18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the saints who are in Ephesus and faithful in Christ Jesus: 2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Praise to God for Spiritual Blessings
3 Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ, 4 just as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love, 5 having predestined us to adoption through Jesus Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his will, 6 to the praise of the glory of his grace that he bestowed on us in the beloved, 7 in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, 8 that he caused to abound to us in all wisdom and insight, 9 making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure that he purposed in him, 10 for the administration of the fullness of times, to bring together all things in Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth, in him 11 in whom also we were chosen, having been predestined according to the purpose of the One who works all things according to the counsel of his will, 12 that we who hoped beforehand in Christ should be for the praise of his glory, 13 in whom also you, when you heard﻿* the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom also when you believed you were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, 14 who is the down payment of our inheritance, until the redemption of the possession, to the praise of his glory. 
Prayer for Spiritual Wisdom
15 Because of this I also, hearing of ⌊your faith⌋ in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints, 16 do not cease giving thanks for you, making mention in my prayers, 17 that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, ⌊the glorious Father⌋,* may give you a spirit of wisdom﻿* and revelation in the knowledge of him 18 (the eyes of your hearts having been enlightened), so that you may know what is the hope of his calling, what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance among the saints, 19 and what is the surpassing greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of his mighty strength 20 which he has worked in Christ, raising﻿* him from the dead and seating him﻿* at his right hand in the heavenly places, 21 above all rule and authority and power and lordship and every name named, not only in this age but also in the coming one, 22 and he subjected all things under his feet and gave him as head over all things to the church, 23 which is his body, the fullness of the one who fills all things in every way. 
Made Alive in Christ
2 And you, ⌊although you were dead⌋﻿* in your trespasses and sins, 2 in which you formerly walked according to the course of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit now working in the sons of disobedience, 3 among whom also we all formerly lived in the desires of our flesh, doing the will of the flesh and of the mind, and we were children of wrath by nature, as also the rest of them were. 
4 But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us, 5 and we being dead in trespasses, he made us alive together with Christ (by grace you are saved), 6 and raised us together and seated us together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, 7 in order that he might show in the coming ages the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness upon us in Christ Jesus. 8 For by grace you are saved through faith, and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God; 9 it is not from works, so that no one can boast. 10 For we are his creation, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, so that we may walk in them. 
Jewish and Gentile Believers United in Christ
11 Therefore remember that formerly you, the Gentiles in the flesh, the so-called uncircumcision by the so-called circumcision in the flesh, made by hands, 12 that you were at that time apart from Christ, alienated from the citizenship of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, not having hope, and without God in the world. 13 But now in Christ Jesus you, the ones who once were far away, have become near by the blood of Christ. 14 For he himself is our peace, who made both one and broke down the dividing wall of the partition, the enmity, in his flesh, 15 invalidating the law of commandments in ordinances, in order that he might create the two in himself into one new man, thus﻿* making peace, 16 and might reconcile both in one body to God through the cross, killing the enmity in himself. 17 And coming, he proclaimed the good news of peace to you who were far away and peace to the ones who were near, 18 because through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father. 19 Consequently, therefore, you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens of the saints and members of the household of God, 20 built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone, 21 in whom the whole building, joined together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord, 22 in whom you also are built up together into a dwelling place of God in the Spirit. 
The Mystery of Christ Revealed
3 On account of this I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles 2 —if indeed you have heard about the stewardship of God’s grace given to me for you. 3 According to revelation the mystery was made known to me, just as I wrote beforehand in brief, 4 so that you may be able when you read to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ 5 (which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit): 6 that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, and fellow members of the body, and fellow sharers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel, 7 of which I became a servant, according to the gift of God’s grace given to me, according to the working of his power. 
8 To me, the least of all the saints, was given this grace: to proclaim the good news of the fathomless riches of Christ to the Gentiles, 9 and to enlighten everyone as to what is the administration of the mystery hidden from the ages by God, who created all things, 10 in order that the many-sided wisdom of God might be made known now to the rulers and the authorities in the heavenly places through the church, 11 according to the purpose of the ages which he carried out in Christ Jesus our Lord, 12 in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through faith in him. 13 Therefore I ask you﻿* not to be discouraged at my afflictions on behalf of you, which are your glory. 
Prayer for Spiritual Strength
14 On account of this, I bend my knees before the Father, 15 from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named, 16 that he may grant you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inner person, 17 that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith (you having been firmly rooted and established in love), 18 in order that you may be strong enough to grasp together with all the saints what is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth, 19 and to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, in order that you may be filled up to all the fullness of God. 
20 Now to the one who is able to do beyond all measure more than all that we ask or think, according to the power that is at work in us, 21 to him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen. 
Christians Should Live in Unity
4 Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord, exhort you to live in a manner worthy of the calling with which you were called: 2 with all humility and gentleness, with patience, putting up with one another in love, 3 being eager to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; 4 one body and one Spirit (just as also you were called with one hope of your calling), 5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 6 one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in all. 
Gifted Leaders Bring the Church to Maturity
7 Now to each one of us was given this grace, according to the measure of Christ’s gift. 8 Therefore it says, 
“Ascending on high he led captivity captive; 
he gave gifts to men.” 
9 Now “he ascended,” what is it, except that he also descended to the lower regions of the earth? 10 The one who descended himself is also the one who ascended above all the heavens, in order that he might fill all things. 
11 And he himself gave some as apostles and some as prophets and some as evangelists and some as pastors and teachers 12 for the equipping of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for building up the body of Christ, 13 until we all reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, to a mature man, to a measure of the maturity of the fullness of Christ, 14 so that we may no longer be infants, tossed about by waves and carried about by every wind of teaching, by the trickery of people, by craftiness with reference to the scheming of deceit. 15 But speaking the truth in love, we are to grow into him with reference to all things, who is the head, Christ, 16 from whom the whole body, joined together and held together by every supporting ligament, according to the working by measure of each single part, the growth of the body makes for the building up of itself in love. 
Appeal for New Behavior
17 This therefore I say and testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the Gentiles walk: in the futility of their mind, 18 being darkened in understanding, alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart, 19 who, becoming callous, gave themselves over to licentiousness, for the pursuit of all uncleanness in greediness. 
20 But you did not learn Christ in this way, 21 if indeed you have heard about him, and you were taught by him (just as truth is in Jesus), 22 that you take off, according to your former way of life, the old man, who is being destroyed according to deceitful desires, 23 be renewed in the spirit of your mind, 24 and put on the new man (in accordance with God), who is created in righteousness and holiness from the truth. 
Old Behavior, New Behavior, and Motivation
25 Therefore, putting aside the lie, speak truth each one of you with his neighbor, because we are members of one another. 26 Be angry and do not sin; do not let the sun set on your anger, 27 nor give place to the devil. 28 The one who steals must steal no longer, but instead must labor, working with his own hands what is good, so that he may have something to share with the one who has need. 29 ⌊No rotten word must proceed⌋ from your mouth, but only something good for the building up of the need, in order that it may give grace to those who hear, 30 and do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. 31 All bitterness, and rage, and wrath, and clamor, and abusive speech, must be removed from you, together with all wickedness. 32 Become kind toward one another, compassionate, forgiving one another, just as also God in Christ has forgiven you. 
Imitators of God
5 Therefore become imitators of God, as beloved children, 2 and live in love, just as also Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and sacrifice to God for a fragrant smell. 3 But sexual immorality, and all uncleanness, or greediness, must not even be named among you (as is fitting for saints), 4 and obscenity, and foolish talk, or coarse jesting (which are not proper), but rather thanksgiving. 5 For this you know ⌊for certain⌋, that every sexually immoral person, or unclean person, or greedy person (who is an idolater), does not have an inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. 6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience. 
Walk Like Children of Light
7 Therefore do not be sharers with them, 8 for you were formerly darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live like children of light 9 (for the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth), 10 trying to learn what is well-pleasing to the Lord. 11 And do not participate in the unfruitful deeds of darkness, but rather even expose them. 12 For it is shameful even to speak about the things being done by them in secret, 13 but all things exposed by the light are made visible, 14 for everything made visible is light. Therefore it says, 
Wake up, sleeper, 
and rise from the dead, 
and Christ will shine on you. 
15 Therefore, consider carefully how you live, not as unwise but as wise, 16 making the most of the time because the days are evil. 
Being Filled by the Spirit
17 Because of this do not become foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is. 18 And do not be drunk with wine (in which is dissipation), but be filled by the Spirit, 19 speaking to one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and singing praise in your heart to the Lord, 20 giving thanks always for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to the God and Father, 21 being subject to one another ⌊out of reverence for⌋ Christ 22 —wives to their own husbands as to the Lord, 23 because the husband is the head of the wife, as also Christ is the head of the church (he himself being the Savior of the body). 24 But as the church is subject to Christ, thus also wives should be subject﻿* to their husbands in everything. 
Husbands and Wives
25 Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for her; 26 in order that he might sanctify her by cleansing her﻿* with the washing of water by the word; 27 in order that he might present to himself the church glorious, not having a spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that she may be holy and blameless. 28 Thus also husbands ought to love their own wives as their own bodies. The one who loves his own wife loves himself. 29 For no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, just as also Christ does the church, 30 because we are members of his body. 31 “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” 32 (This mystery is great, but I am speaking with reference to Christ and the church.) 33 Only you also, each one of you, must thus love his own wife as himself, and the wife ⌊must respect⌋ her husband. 
Children and Parents
6 Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. 2 “Honor your father and mother” (which is the first commandment with a promise), 3 “in order that it may be well with you, and you may ⌊live a long time⌋ on the earth.” 4 And fathers, do not make your children angry, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. 
Slaves and Masters
5 Slaves, obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling, in the sincerity of your heart, as to Christ, 6 not ⌊while being watched⌋, as people pleasers, but as slaves of Christ doing the will of God from the heart, 7 serving with goodwill as to the Lord and not to people, 8 because you﻿* know that each one of you, whatever good he should do, this he will receive back from the Lord, whether slave or free. 9 And masters, do the same things to them, giving up threats, knowing that both their Lord and yours is in heaven, and there is no partiality with him. 
Spiritual Warfare
10 Finally, become strong in the Lord and in the might of his strength. 11 Put on the full armor of God, so that you may be able to stand against the stratagems of the devil, 12 because our struggle is not against blood and flesh, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly places. 13 Because of this, take up the full armor of God, in order that you may be able to resist in the evil day, and having done everything, to stand. 14 Stand therefore, girding your waist with truth, and putting on the breastplate of righteousness, 15 and binding shoes under your feet with the preparation of the good news of peace, 16 in everything taking up the shield of faith, with which you are able to quench all the flaming arrows of the evil one, 17 and receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, 18 with all prayer and supplication praying at all times in the Spirit, and to this end being alert with all perseverance and supplication for all the saints, 19 and for me, that a word may be given to me at the opening of my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel, 20 for the sake of which I am an ambassador in chains, that ⌊in them⌋ I may speak freely, as it is necessary for me to speak. 
Conclusion and Benediction
21 Now, so that you also may know ⌊my circumstances⌋, what I am doing, Tychicus, my dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make known to you all things, 22 whom I have sent to you for this very reason, that you may know ⌊our circumstances⌋, and he may encourage your hearts. 
23 Peace to the brothers and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 24 Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruptibility.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO THE PHILIPPIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, together with the overseers and deacons. 2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Thanksgiving
3 I give thanks to my God upon my every remembrance of you, 4 always in my every prayer for all of you, making the prayer with joy, 5 because of your participation in the gospel from the first day until now, 6 convinced of this same thing, that the one who began a good work in you will finish it﻿* until the day of Christ Jesus, 7 just as it is right for me to think this about all of you, because I have you in my heart, since﻿* both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel all of you are sharers of grace with me. 8 For God is my witness, that I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus. 
Prayer for Spiritual Maturity
9 And this I pray: that your love may abound still more and more in knowledge and all discernment, 10 so that you may approve what is superior, in order that you may be sincere and blameless in the day of Christ, 11 having been filled with the fruit of righteousness which comes through Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God. 
The Progress of the Gospel
12 Now I want you to know, brothers, that ⌊my circumstances⌋ have happened instead for the progress of the gospel, 13 so that my imprisonment in Christ has become known in the whole praetorium and to all the rest, 14 and most of the brothers, trusting in the Lord because of my imprisonment, dare even more to speak the word without fear. 15 Some even because of envy and strife preach Christ, but some also because of good will. 16 The latter do so from love, knowing that I am appointed for the defense of the gospel. 17 The former proclaim Christ from selfish ambition, not sincerely, thinking to raise up affliction in my imprisonment. 18 ⌊What is the result?⌋ Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed, and in this I rejoice. But also I will rejoice, 19 for I know that this will turn out to me for deliverance through your prayer and the support of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, 20 according to my eager expectation and hope, that I will be put to shame in nothing, but with all boldness, even now as always Christ will be exalted in my body, whether through life or through death. 21 For to me to live is Christ and to die is gain. 22 But if it is to live in the flesh, this is fruitful work for me, and which I will prefer I do not know. 23 But I am hard pressed ⌊between the two options⌋, having the desire to depart and to be with Christ, ⌊for this is very much better⌋. 24 But to stay on in the flesh is more necessary for your sake. 25 And because I am﻿* convinced of this, I know that I will remain and continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith, 26 so that what you can be proud of may increase in Christ Jesus because of me through my return again to you. 
Stand Firm for the Gospel
27 Only lead your lives in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that whether I come and see you or am absent I hear ⌊your circumstances⌋, that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one soul contending side by side for the faith of the gospel, 28 and not letting yourselves be intimidated in anything by your opponents, which is a sign of destruction to them, but of your salvation, and this from God, 29 because to you has been graciously granted on behalf of Christ not only to believe in him, but also to suffer on behalf of him, 30 having the same struggle which you saw in me and now hear about in me. 
Humility and Unity
2 Therefore, if there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any affection and compassion, 2 complete my joy, so that ⌊you are in agreement⌋, having the same love, united in spirit, ⌊having one purpose⌋. 3 Do nothing according to selfish ambition or according to empty conceit, but in humility considering one another better than yourselves, 4 each of you not looking out for ⌊your own interests⌋, but also each of you for ⌊the interests⌋ of others. 
Christ’s Humiliation and Exaltation
5 Think this in yourselves which was also in Christ Jesus, 
6 who, existing in the form of God, 
did not consider being equal with God something to be grasped, 
7 but emptied himself 
by﻿* taking the form of a slave, 
by﻿* becoming in the likeness of people. 
And being found in appearance like a man, 
8 he humbled himself 
by﻿* becoming obedient to the point of death, 
that is, death on a cross. 
9 Therefore also God exalted him 
and graciously granted him the name above every name, 
10 so that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow, 
of those in heaven and of those on earth and of those under the earth, 
11 and every tongue confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father. 
Holding Fast to the Word of Life
12 Therefore my dear friends, just as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. 13 For the one at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure, is God. 14 Do all things without grumbling and disputing, 15 in order that you may become blameless and innocent, children of God without fault in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation, among whom you shine as stars in the world, 16 holding fast to the word of life, for a source of pride to me in the day of Christ, that I did not run in vain or labor in vain. 17 But even if I am being poured out as a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and rejoice with all of you. 18 And in the same way also you rejoice and rejoice with me. 
Timothy’s Proven Character
19 But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I also may be encouraged when I﻿* know ⌊your circumstances⌋. 20 For I have no one like-minded who will sincerely be concerned about ⌊your circumstances⌋. 21 For they all seek ⌊their own interests⌋, not those of Jesus Christ. 22 But you know his proven character, that like a child with a father he served with me for the gospel. 23 Therefore I hope to send him at once, as soon as I see ⌊my circumstances⌋. 24 And I am convinced in the Lord that I myself will arrive shortly also. 
Epaphroditus’ Mission
25 But I considered it﻿* necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, but your messenger and servant of my need, 26 because he was longing for all of you and was distressed because you had heard that he was sick. 27 For indeed he was sick, coming near to death, but God had mercy on him and not on him only, but also on me, so that I would not have grief upon grief. 28 Therefore I am sending him with special urgency, in order that when﻿* you see him again you may rejoice, and I may be less anxious. 29 Therefore welcome him in the Lord with all joy, and consider such people highly honored, 30 because on account of the work of Christ he came near to the point of death, risking his life in order that ⌊he might make up for your inability to serve me⌋. 
Warning Against Evil Workers
3 Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you is not troublesome to me, but is a safeguard for you. 2 Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workers, beware of the mutilation. 3 For we are the circumcision, the ones who worship by the Spirit of God and boast in Christ Jesus and do not put confidence in the flesh, 4 although I could have confidence even in the flesh. 
Righteousness Through Christ
If anyone else thinks to put confidence in the flesh, I can do so more: 5 ⌊circumcised on the eighth day⌋, from the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born from Hebrews, according to the law a Pharisee, 6 according to zeal persecuting the church, according to the righteousness in the law being blameless. 7 But whatever things were gain to me, these things I have considered loss because of Christ. 8 ⌊More than that⌋, I even consider all things to be loss because of the surpassing greatness of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for the sake of whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and consider them﻿* dung, in order that I may gain Christ 9 and may be found in him, not having my righteousness which is from the law, but which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God on the basis of faith, 10 so that I may know him and the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of his sufferings, being conformed to his death, 11 if somehow I may attain to the resurrection from the dead. 12 Not that I have already received this,* or have already been made perfect, but I press on if indeed I may lay hold of that for which also I was laid hold of by Christ. 13 Brothers, I do not consider myself to have laid hold of it.* But I do one thing, forgetting the things behind and straining toward the things ahead, 14 I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus. 
Imitate Paul
15 Therefore as many as are perfect, ⌊let us hold this opinion⌋, and if you think anything differently, God will reveal this also to you. 16 Only to what we have attained, to the same hold on. 17 Become fellow imitators of me, brothers, and observe those who walk in this way, just as you have us as an example. 18 For many live, of whom I spoke about to you many times, but now speak about even weeping, as the enemies of the cross of Christ, 19 whose end is destruction, whose God is the stomach, and whose glory is in their shame, the ones who think on earthly things. 20 For our commonwealth exists in heaven, from which also we eagerly await a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, 21 who will transform our humble body to be conformed to his glorious body, in accordance with the power that enables him even to subject all things to himself. 
Appeal for Unity
4 So then, my beloved and greatly desired brothers, my joy and crown, thus stand firm in the Lord, dear friends. 2 I appeal to Euodia and I appeal to Syntyche ⌊to be in agreement⌋ in the Lord. 3 Yes, I ask also you, true yokefellow, help them, who struggled along with me in the gospel with both Clement and the rest of my fellow workers whose names are in the book of life. 
Be Anxious for Nothing
4 Rejoice in the Lord always; again I say, rejoice. 5 Let your gentleness be made known to all people. The Lord is near. 6 Be anxious for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God. 7 And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. 8 Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are honorable, whatever things are right, whatever things are pure, whatever things are pleasing, whatever things are commendable, if there is any excellence of character and if anything praiseworthy, think about these things. 9 And the things which you have learned and received and heard about and seen in me, practice these things, and the God of peace will be with you. 
Support for Paul’s Ministry
10 But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly that now at last ⌊you have renewed your concern for me⌋, for whom also you were thinking, but you had no opportunity to express it. 11 Not that I speak from need, for I have learned to be content in whatever circumstances I am. 12 I know how both ⌊to make do with little⌋ and I know how ⌊to have an abundance⌋. In everything and in all things I have learned the secret both to be filled and to be hungry, both ⌊to have an abundance⌋ and to go without. 13 I am able to do all things by the one who strengthens me. 14 Nevertheless you have done well by sharing﻿* with me in my affliction. 15 Now you also know, Philippians, that at the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving except you alone, 16 because even in Thessalonica ⌊on more than one occasion⌋ you sent for my need. 17 Not that I seek the gift, but I seek for the profit that increases to your account. 18 But I have received everything in full and have an abundance; ⌊I am well supplied⌋ because﻿* I received from Epaphroditus ⌊what you had sent⌋, a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God. 19 And my God will fulfill your every need according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus. 20 Now to our God and Father be the glory ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen. 
Final Greetings and Benediction
21 Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers with me greet you. 22 All the saints greet you, and especially those of Caesar’s household. 23 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO THE COLOSSIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother, 2 to the saints and faithful brothers in Christ in Colossae. Grace to you and peace from God our Father. 
Thanksgiving for the Colossian Believers
3 We give thanks always to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ when we﻿* pray for you, 4 since we﻿* heard about your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you have for all the saints, 5 because of the hope reserved for you in heaven, which you have heard about beforehand in the word of truth, the gospel, 6 that has come to you, just as also in all the world it is bearing fruit and increasing, just as also among you from the day you heard about and understood the grace of God in truth, 7 just as you learned it﻿* from Epaphras, our dear fellow slave who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf, 8 who also made clear to us your love in the Spirit. 
Prayer for Maturity Based on Christ’s Preeminence
9 Because of this also we, from the day we heard about it,* did not cease praying for you, and asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual insight, 10 so that you may live in a manner worthy of the Lord, ⌊to please him in all respects⌋, bearing fruit in every good deed and increasing in the knowledge of God, 11 enabled with all power, according to his glorious might, for all steadfastness and patience with joy, 12 giving thanks to the Father who has qualified you for a share of the inheritance of the saints in light, 13 who has rescued us from the domain of darkness and transferred us﻿* to the kingdom of the Son ⌊he loves⌋, 14 in whom we have the redemption, the forgiveness of sins, 15 who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all﻿* creation, 16 because all things in the heavens and on the earth were created by him, things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or powers, all things were created through him and for him, 17 and he himself is before all things, and in him all things are held together, 18 and he himself is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he himself may become first in everything, 19 because he was well pleased for all the fullness to dwell in him, 20 and through him to reconcile all things to himself, by﻿* making peace through the blood of his cross, through him, whether things on earth or things in heaven. 
21 And ⌊although you were formerly alienated⌋﻿* and enemies in attitude, because of your evil deeds, 22 but now you have been reconciled by ⌊his physical body⌋ through death, to present you holy and blameless and above reproach before him, 23 if indeed you remain in the faith, established and steadfast and not shifted away from the hope of the gospel that you heard, which was proclaimed in all creation under heaven, of which I, Paul, became a minister. 
Paul’s Suffering and Stewardship
24 Now I rejoice in my sufferings on behalf of you, and I fill up in my flesh what is lacking of the afflictions of Christ, on behalf of his body which is the church, 25 of which I became a minister, according to God’s stewardship which was given to me for you, to complete the word of God, 26 the mystery which has been hidden from the ages and from the generations, but has now been revealed to his saints, 27 to whom God wanted to make known what is the glorious wealth of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory, 28 whom we proclaim, by﻿* admonishing every person and teaching every person with all wisdom, in order that we may present every person mature in Christ, 29 for which purpose also I labor, striving according to his working which is at work powerfully in me. 
Christ, the Mystery of God
2 For I want you to know how great a struggle I have on behalf of you, and those in Laodicea, and all those who have not seen my face ⌊in person⌋, 2 so that their hearts may be encouraged, united in love and into all the wealth of the full assurance of insight into the knowledge of the mystery of God, Christ, 3 in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. 4 I say this in order that no one will deceive you with persuasive speech, 5 for even if I am absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in spirit, rejoicing and seeing your good order and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ. 
Made Alive in Christ
6 Therefore as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, live in him, 7 firmly rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding with thankfulness. 8 Beware lest ⌊anyone take you captive⌋ through philosophy and empty deceit, according to ⌊human tradition⌋, according to the elemental spirits of the world and not according to Christ, 9 because in him all the fullness of deity dwells bodily, 10 and you are filled in him, who is the head over every ruler and authority, 11 in whom also you were circumcised with a circumcision not made by hands, by the removal of the body of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, 12 having been buried with him in baptism, in which also you were raised together with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead. 13 And ⌊although you were dead⌋﻿* in the trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, he made you alive together with him, having forgiven us all our trespasses, 14 having destroyed the certificate of indebtedness in ordinances against us, which was hostile to us, and removed it out of the way by﻿* nailing it to the cross. 15 When he﻿* had disarmed the rulers and the authorities, he made a display of them in public, triumphing over them by it. 
Do Not Be Judged by Human Religious Rules
16 Therefore do not let anyone judge you with reference to eating or drinking or participation in a feast or a new moon or a Sabbath, 17 which are a shadow of what is to come, but the reality is Christ. 18 Let no one condemn you, taking pleasure in humility and the worship of angels, going into detail about the things which he has seen, inflated without cause by his fleshly mind, 19 and not holding fast to the head, from whom the whole body, supported and held together by the ligaments and sinews, grows with the growth of God. 
20 If you have died with Christ to the elemental spirits of the world, why do you submit to them as if living in the world? 21 “Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch,” 22 which things are all meant for destruction by consuming according to human commandments and teachings, 23 which things ⌊although they have⌋,* to be sure, an appearance of wisdom in self-made religion and humility and unsparing treatment of the body, ⌊do not have any value⌋ against the indulgence of the flesh. 
Seek the Things Above
3 Therefore, if you have been raised together with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. 2 Set your mind on the things above, not on the things on earth. 3 For you have died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. 4 When Christ, who is your life, is revealed, then you also will be revealed with him in glory. 
Put Off the Old Behavior
5 Therefore put to death ⌊what is earthly in you⌋: sexual immorality, uncleanness, lustful passion, evil desire, and greediness, which is idolatry, 6 because of which the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience, 7 in which also you once lived, when you used to live in them. 8 But now you also lay aside all these things: anger, rage, wickedness, slander, abusive language from your mouth. 9 Do not lie to one another, because you﻿* have taken off the old man together with his deeds, 10 and have put on the new man that is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of the one who created him, 11 where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, slave, or free, but Christ is all, and in all. 
Appeal for New Behavior
12 Therefore, as the chosen of God, holy and dearly loved, put on affection, compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, patience, 13 putting up with one another and forgiving one another. If anyone should have a complaint against anyone, just as also the Lord forgave you, thus also you do the same. 14 And to all these things add love, which is the bond of perfection. 15 And the peace of Christ must rule in your hearts, to which also you were called in one body, and be thankful. 16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another with all wisdom, with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with thankfulness in your hearts to God, 17 and everything ⌊whatever⌋ you do in word or in deed, giving thanks for all things in the name of the Lord Jesus to God the Father through him. 
Mutual Responsibilities in Christian Relationships
18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. 19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be embittered against them. 20 Children, obey your parents in everything, for this is pleasing in the Lord. 21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, so that they will not become discouraged. 22 Slaves, obey your ⌊human⌋ masters in everything, not ⌊while being watched⌋, as people pleasers, but with sincerity of heart, fearing the Lord. 23 Whatever you do, accomplish it from the soul, as to the Lord, and not to people, 24 because you﻿* know that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the inheritance. Serve the Lord Christ. 25 For the one who does wrong will receive back whatever wrong he has done, and there is no partiality. 
4 Masters, grant your slaves justice and fairness, knowing that you also have a master in heaven. 
Further Advice for the Christian Life
2 Be devoted to prayer, keeping alert in it with thanksgiving, 3 praying at the same time for us also, that God may open for us a door of the message, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which also ⌊I am a prisoner⌋, 4 so that I may reveal it, as it is necessary for me to speak. 5 Live with wisdom toward those outside, making the most of the time. 6 Let your speech always be with grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how it is necessary for you to answer each one. 
Exhortations Regarding Fellow Workers
7 Tychicus, my dear brother and faithful servant and fellow slave in the Lord, will make known to you all ⌊my circumstances⌋, 8 whom I have sent to you for this very reason, in order that you may know ⌊our circumstances⌋ and he may encourage your hearts, 9 together with Onesimus, my faithful and dear brother, who is one of you. They will make known to you all ⌊the circumstances⌋ here. 
10 Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you received instructions—if he should come to you, welcome him), 11 and Jesus who is called Justus. These are the only ones who are fellow workers for the kingdom of God from the circumcision, who have been a comfort to me. 12 Epaphras, who is one of you, greets you, a slave of Christ always struggling on behalf of you in his prayers, that you may stand mature and fully assured in all the will of God. 13 For I testify to him that ⌊he is working hard⌋ on behalf of you and those in Laodicea and those in Hierapolis. 14 Luke the physician, our dear friend, greets you, as does Demas. 15 Greet the brothers in Laodicea, and Nympha and the church in her house. 16 And whenever this letter is read among you, ⌊see to it⌋ that it is read also among the Laodicean church, and that you also read the letter from Laodicea. 17 And tell Archippus, “Direct your attention to the ministry that you received in the Lord, in order that you may complete it.” 
Final Greeting and Benediction
18 The greeting is by my hand, Paul’s. Remember my ⌊imprisonment⌋. Grace be with you.

THE FIRST LETTER OF PAUL TO THE THESSALONIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace to you and peace. 
Thanksgiving for the Thessalonian Believers
2 We give thanks to God always concerning all of you, making mention constantly in our prayers, 3 because we﻿* remember your work of faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father, 4 knowing, brothers dearly loved by God, ⌊that he has chosen you⌋, 5 because our gospel did not come to you with word only, but also with power and with the Holy Spirit and with much certainty, just as you know what sort of people we became among you for your sake. 6 And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, receiving the word in much affliction, with the joy of the Holy Spirit, 7 so that you became an example to all those who believe in Macedonia and in Achaia, 8 for from you the word of the Lord has sounded forth, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith toward God has gone out, so that we have no need to say anything. 9 For they themselves report about us, what sort of welcome we had with you, and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, 10 and to await his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus, the one who delivers us from the coming wrath. 
Paul’s Approach to Ministry in Thessalonica
2 For you yourselves know, brothers, our reception with you, that it was not in vain, 2 but after we had already suffered and been mistreated in Philippi, just as you know, we had the courage in our God to speak to you the gospel of God amid much opposition. 3 For our exhortation is not from error or from impurity or with deceit, 4 but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, thus we speak, not as pleasing people but God, who examines our hearts. 5 ⌊For never⌋ did we come with a word of flattery, just as you know, nor with a pretext of greediness (God is witness), 6 nor seeking glory from people, neither from you nor from others. 7 ⌊Although we could have insisted on our own importance⌋﻿* as apostles of Christ, yet we became infants in your midst, like a nursing mother cherishes her own children. 8 Longing for you in this way, we determined to share with you not only the gospel of God but also our own souls, because you had become dear to us. 
9 For you remember, brothers, our labor and hardship: working by night and day in order not to be a burden to any of you, we proclaimed to you the gospel of God. 10 You are witnesses, and so is God, how devoutly and righteously and blamelessly we became to you who believe, 11 just as you know how we treated each one of you, like a father his own children, 12 exhorting and consoling you and insisting that you live in a manner worthy of God, who calls you to his own kingdom and glory. 
The Thessalonians’ Response to Paul’s Message
13 And because of this we also give thanks to God constantly, that when you﻿* received God’s word ⌊that you heard⌋ from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but as it truly is, the word of God, which also is at work in you who believe. 14 For you became imitators, brothers, of the churches of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus, because you also suffered the same things at the hands of your own people, just as they themselves did also at the hands of the Jews, 15 who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and who persecuted us, and who are not pleasing to God and are opposed to all people, 16 hindering us from speaking to the Gentiles in order that they may be saved, so that they always fill up their sins. But wrath has come upon them to the end. 
Paul’s Desire to Revisit the Thessalonians
17 But when﻿* we were made orphans by separation from you, brothers, for ⌊a short time⌋ (in face, not in heart), we were even more eager with great desire to see your face, 18 because we wanted to come to you—I, Paul, ⌊on more than one occasion⌋—and Satan hindered us. 19 For who is our hope or joy or crown of boasting? Is it not even you, in the presence of our Lord Jesus at his coming? 20 For you are our glory and joy. 
Paul Sends Timothy to Thessalonica
3 Therefore when we﻿* could bear it no longer, we determined to be left behind in Athens alone, 2 and we sent Timothy, our brother and fellow worker for God in the gospel of Christ, in order to strengthen and to encourage you about your faith, 3 so that no one would be shaken by these afflictions. For you yourselves know that we are appointed for this, 4 for indeed when we were with you we told you beforehand that we were about to be afflicted, just as indeed it happened, and you know. 5 Because of this, I also, when I﻿* could endure it no longer, sent in order to know your faith, lest somehow the tempter tempted you and our labor should be in vain. 
Timothy’s Positive Report
6 But now, because﻿* Timothy has come to us from you and has brought good news to us of your faith and love, and that ⌊you always think kindly of us⌋, desiring to see us just as also we desire to see you, 7 because of this, brothers, we have been comforted because of you in all our distress and affliction through your faith, 8 because now we live, if you stand firm in the Lord. 9 For what thanks can we repay to God concerning you, because of all the joy with which we rejoice because of you before our God, 10 night and day praying beyond all measure that we may see your face and complete what is lacking in your faith? 
11 Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus direct our way to you, 12 and may the Lord cause you to increase and to abound in love for one another and for all, just as also we do for you, 13 so that your hearts may be established blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints. 
Appeal for Continuing Sanctification
4 Finally therefore, brothers, we ask you and appeal to you in the Lord Jesus that, just as you have received from us how it is necessary for you to live and to please God, just as indeed you are living, that you progress even more. 2 For you know what commands we gave to you through the Lord Jesus. 3 For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from sexual immorality; 4 that each of you know how to possess his own vessel in sanctification and honor, 5 not in lustful passion, just as also the Gentiles who do not know God; 6 not to transgress and to exploit his brother in the matter, because the Lord is the one who avenges concerning all these things, just as also we told you beforehand and testified solemnly. 7 For God did not call us to impurity, but in holiness. 8 Therefore the one who rejects this is not rejecting man, but God, who also gives his Holy Spirit to you. 
Affirmation of Continuing Love
9 But concerning brotherly love, I do not have need to write to you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another, 10 for indeed you are practicing it toward all the brothers in all of Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers, to progress even more, 11 and to aspire to live a quiet life, and to attend to ⌊your own business⌋, and to work with your hands, just as we commanded you, 12 so that you may live decently toward those outside, and may have need of nothing. 
The Comfort of the Lord’s Return
13 Now we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, concerning those who have fallen asleep, so that you will not grieve as also the rest, who have no hope. 14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, thus also God will bring those who have fallen asleep through Jesus together with him. 15 For this we say to you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive, who remain until the Lord’s coming, will not possibly precede those who have fallen asleep. 16 For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout of command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first. 17 Then we who are alive, who remain, will be snatched away at the same time together with them in the clouds for a meeting with the Lord in the air, and thus we will be together with the Lord always. 18 Therefore comfort one another with these words. 
The Sudden Arrival of the Day of the Lord
5 Now concerning the times and the seasons, brothers, you have no need of anything to be written to you, 2 for you yourselves well know that the day of the Lord is coming in the same way as a thief in the night. 3 Whenever they say “Peace and security,” then sudden destruction will overtake them like the birth pains of ⌊a pregnant woman⌋, and they will not possibly escape. 4 But you, brothers, are not in the darkness, so that the day should catch you like a thief, 5 for you are all sons of light and sons of day. We are not of the night nor of darkness. 
6 So then, we must not sleep like the rest, but must be on the alert and be self-controlled. 7 For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk, are drunk at night. 8 But because we are of the day, we must be sober, by putting on the breastplate of faith and love and as a helmet the hope of salvation, 9 because God did not appoint us for wrath, but for the obtaining of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, 10 who died for us, so that whether we are awake or asleep, we will live at the same time with him. 11 Therefore encourage one another and build up ⌊each other⌋ , just as indeed you are doing. 
Final Exhortations and Benediction
12 Now we ask you, brothers, to respect those who labor among you and rule over you in the Lord and admonish you, 13 and to esteem them beyond all measure in love, because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves. 
14 And we urge you, brothers, admonish the disorderly, console the discouraged, help the sick, be patient toward all people. 15 See to it that no one pays back evil for evil to anyone, but always pursue good toward one another and toward all people. 
16 Rejoice always, 17 pray constantly, 18 give thanks in everything; for this is the will of God for you in Christ Jesus. 19 Do not quench the Spirit. 20 Do not despise prophecies, 21 but examine all things; hold fast to what is good. 22 Abstain from every form of evil. 23 Now may the God of peace himself sanctify you completely, and may your spirit and soul and body be kept complete, blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 24 The one who calls you is faithful, who also will do this. 
25 Brothers, pray for us. 26 Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss. 27 I adjure you by the Lord, have this letter read aloud to all the brothers. 28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

THE SECOND LETTER OF PAUL TO THE THESSALONIANS
 
Greeting
1 Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Grace to you and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Thanksgiving for the Thessalonian Believers
3 We ought to give thanks to God always concerning you, brothers, just as it is fitting, because your faith is flourishing and the love of each one of you all toward one another is increasing 4 so that we ourselves boast in you in the churches of God about your patient endurance and faith in all your persecutions and the afflictions that you are enduring, 5 a proof of the righteous judgment of God, so that you may be considered worthy of the kingdom of God, on behalf of which also you are suffering, 6 since it is righteous in the sight of God to pay back those who are afflicting you with affliction, 7 and to you who are being afflicted, rest with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels, 8 with burning flame giving punishment to those who do not know God and who do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus, 9 who will pay the penalty of eternal destruction, away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his strength, 10 whenever he should come to be glorified on that day by his saints and to be marveled at by all who believe, because our testimony was believed among you, 11 for which purpose we also pray always for you, that you may be considered worthy of the calling of our God, and he might fulfill every desire for goodness and work of faith with power, 12 in order that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
The Man of Lawlessness Will Be Revealed
2 Now we ask you, brothers, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our assembling to him, 2 that you not be easily shaken from your composure, nor be troubled either by a spirit or by a message or by a letter ⌊alleged to be from us⌋, to the effect that the day of the Lord has arrived. 3 Do not let anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not come unless the rebellion comes first, and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the son of destruction, 4 who opposes and who exalts himself over every so-called god or object of worship, so that he sits down in the temple of God, proclaiming that he himself is God. 
5 Do you not remember that while we were still with you, we were saying these things to you? 6 And you know that which restrains him now, so that he will be revealed in his own time. 7 For the mystery of lawlessness is at work already; only the one who now restrains will do so until he is out of the way, 8 and then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will slay with the breath of his mouth, and wipe out by the appearance of his coming, 9 whose coming is in accordance with the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, 10 and with every unrighteous deception against those who are perishing, in place of which they did not accept the love of the truth, so that they would be saved. 11 And because of this, God sends them ⌊a powerful delusion⌋  so that they will believe the lie, 12 in order that all may be condemned who did not believe the truth, but delighted in unrighteousness. 
Stand Firm and Hold Fast
13 But we ought to give thanks to God always concerning you, brothers dearly loved by the Lord, because God has chosen you as first fruits for salvation by the sanctification of the Spirit and faith in the truth, 14 for which purpose he called you through our gospel for the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 15 So then, brothers, stand firm and hold fast to the traditions which you were taught, whether by spoken word or by letter from us. 16 Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who has loved us and given us eternal encouragement and good hope by grace, 17 encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good work and word. 
Paul’s Prayer Request
3 Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may progress and be honored, just as also it was with you, 2 and that we may be delivered from evil and wicked people, ⌊for not all have the faith⌋. 3 But the Lord is faithful, who will strengthen you and guard you from the evil one. 4 And we have confidence in the Lord about you, that you are both doing and you will do the things that we are commanding. 5 Now may the Lord direct your hearts toward the love of God and toward the patient endurance of Christ. 
Warning Against Lazy, Irresponsible Behavior
6 But we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you keep away from every brother who lives irresponsibly and not according to the tradition that they received from us. 7 For you yourselves know how it is necessary to imitate us, that we did not behave irresponsibly among you, 8 nor did we eat bread from anyone without paying, but with toil and labor, we were working night and day in order not to be a burden to any of you, 9 not that we do not have the right, but so that we may give ourselves as an example to you, so that you may imitate us. 10 For even when we were with you, we used to command this to you: that if anyone does not want to work, neither should he eat. 11 For we hear that some among you are living irresponsibly, working at nothing, but being busybodies. 12 Now we command and we exhort such people in the Lord Jesus Christ that, working with quietness, they eat their own bread. 13 But as for you, brothers, do not be discouraged while﻿* doing what is right. 14 But if anyone does not obey our message through this letter, take note not to associate with him, in order that he may be put to shame. 15 And do not consider him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. 
Final Greeting and Benediction
16 Now may the Lord of peace himself grant you peace through everything in every way. May the Lord be with all of you. 17 The greeting is by my hand, Paul’s, which is ⌊a sign of genuineness⌋ in every letter: ⌊this is how I write⌋. 18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you.

THE FIRST LETTER OF PAUL TO TIMOTHY
 
Greeting
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope, 2 to Timothy, my true child in the faith. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Instructions for Timothy in Ephesus
3 Just as I urged you when I﻿* traveled to Macedonia, remain in Ephesus, so that you may instruct certain people not to teach other doctrine, 4 and not to pay attention to myths and endless genealogies, which cause useless speculations rather than God’s plan that is by faith. 5 But the goal of our instruction is love from a pure heart and a good conscience and a faith without hypocrisy, 6 from which some have deviated, and have turned away into fruitless discussion, 7 wanting to be teachers of the law, although they﻿* do not understand either the things which they are saying or the things concerning which they are speaking confidently. 
8 But we know that the law is good, if anyone makes use of it lawfully, 9 knowing this, that the law is not given for a righteous person but for the lawless and rebellious, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and totally worldly, for the one who kills his father and the one who kills his mother, for murderers, 10 sexually immoral people, homosexuals, kidnappers, liars, perjurers, and ⌊whatever⌋ else is opposed to sound teaching, 11 according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God that I was entrusted with. 
Paul’s Thankfulness for the Mercy Shown to Him
12 ⌊I give thanks⌋ to the one who strengthens me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he considered me faithful, placing me into ministry, 13 although I﻿* was formerly a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent man, but I was shown mercy because I acted ignorantly in unbelief, 14 and the grace of our Lord abounded with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. 15 The saying is trustworthy and worthy of all acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the foremost. 16 But because of this I was shown mercy, in order that in me foremost, Christ Jesus might demonstrate his total patience, for an example for those who are going to believe in him for eternal life. 17 Now to the King of the ages, immortal, invisible, to the only God, be honor and glory ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen. 
Paul’s Charge to Timothy
18 I am setting before you this instruction, Timothy my child, in accordance with the prophecies spoken long ago about you, in order that by them you may fight the good fight, 19 having faith and a good conscience, which some, because they﻿* have rejected these, have suffered shipwreck concerning their faith, 20 among whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan, in order that they may be taught not to blaspheme. 
Instructions to Pray for All People
2 Therefore, I urge first of all that petitions, prayers, requests, and thanksgiving be made on behalf of all people, 2 on behalf of kings and all those who are in authority, in order that we may live a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and dignity. 3 This is good and acceptable before God our Savior, 4 who wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth. 5 For there is one God and one mediator between God and human beings, the man Christ Jesus, 6 who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony at the proper time, 7 for which I was appointed a herald and an apostle—I am speaking the truth, I am not lying—a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth. 8 Therefore I want the men in every place to pray, lifting up holy hands without anger and dispute. 
Instructions for Women
9 Likewise also the women should adorn themselves in appropriate clothing, with modesty and self-control, not with braided hair and gold jewelry or pearls or expensive clothing, 10 but with good deeds which are fitting for women who profess godliness. 11 A woman must learn in quietness with all submission. 12 But I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man, but ⌊to remain quiet⌋. 13 For Adam was formed first, then Eve, 14 and Adam was not deceived, but the woman, because she﻿* was deceived, came into transgression. 15 But she will be saved through the bearing of children, if she continues in faith and love and holiness with self-control. 
Qualifications for Overseers
3 The saying is trustworthy: if anyone aspires to supervision, he desires a good work. 2 Therefore the overseer must be irreproachable, the husband of one wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, skillful in teaching, 3 not addicted to wine, not a violent person, but gentle, peaceable, not loving money, 4 managing his own household well, having children in submission with all dignity 5 (but if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he take care of the church of God?), 6 not newly converted, lest he become conceited and fall into the condemnation of the devil. 7 But he must also have a good testimony from those outside, in order that he may not fall into disgrace and the trap of the devil. 
Qualifications for Deacons
8 Deacons likewise must be dignified, not insincere, not devoted to much wine, not fond of dishonest gain, 9 holding the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience, 10 and these also must be tested first; then let them serve if they﻿* are above reproach. 11 The wives likewise must be dignified, not slanderous, temperate, faithful in all things. 12 Deacons must be husbands of one wife, managing their children and their own households well. 13 For those who have served well acquire a good standing for themselves, and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus. 
The Mystery of Godliness Described
14 I am writing these things to you, hoping to come to you in a short time. 15 But if I am delayed, I am writing﻿* in order that you may know how one must conduct oneself in the household of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and mainstay of the truth. 16 And most certainly, great is the mystery of godliness: 
Who was revealed in the flesh, 
was vindicated by the Spirit, 
was seen by angels, 
was proclaimed among the Gentiles, 
was believed on in the world, 
was taken up in glory. 
The Coming Apostasy
4 Now the Spirit explicitly says that in the last times some will depart from the faith, paying attention to deceitful spirits and teachings of demons, 2 by the hypocrisy of liars, who are seared in their own conscience, 3 who forbid marrying and insist on abstaining from foods that God created for sharing in with thankfulness by those who believe and who know the truth, 4 because everything created by God is good and nothing is to be rejected if it is﻿* received with thankfulness, 5 for it is made holy by the word of God and prayer. 
The Good Servant of Christ
6 By﻿* teaching these things to the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, trained in the words of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed faithfully. 7 But reject those ⌊worthless myths told by elderly women⌋, and train yourself for godliness. 8 For the training of the body is ⌊somewhat⌋ profitable, but godliness is profitable for everything, because it﻿* holds promise for the present life and for the life to come. 9 The statement is trustworthy and deserving of complete acceptance. 10 For to this end we labor and suffer reproach, because we have put our hope in the living God, who is the Savior of all people, especially of believers. 
11 Command these things and teach them. 12 Let no one look down on your youth, but be an example for the believers in word, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity. 13 Until I come, pay attention to the public reading, to exhortation, to teaching. 14 Do not neglect the gift that is in you, that was granted to you through prophecy with the laying on of hands by the council of elders. 15 Practice these things. Be diligent in these things, in order that your progress may be evident to everyone. 16 Fix your attention on yourself and on your teaching. Continue in them, for by﻿* doing this you will save both yourself and those who hear you. 
Instructions About Widows
5 Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as a father, younger men as brothers, 2 older women as mothers, younger women as sisters, with all purity. 3 Honor widows who are truly widows. 4 But if any widow has children or grandchildren, they must learn to show profound respect for their own household first, and to pay back recompense to their parents, for this is pleasing in the sight of God. 5 But the widow who is one truly, and is left alone, has put her hope in God and continues in her petitions and prayers night and day. 6 But the one who lives for sensual pleasure is dead even though she﻿* lives. 7 And command these things, in order that they may be irreproachable. 8 But if someone does not provide for his own relatives, and especially the members of his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever. 
9 Let a widow be put on the list if she﻿* is not less than sixty years old, the wife of one husband, 10 being well-attested by good works, if she has brought up children, if she has shown hospitality, if she has washed the feet of the saints, if she has helped those who are oppressed, if she has devoted herself to every good work. 11 But refuse younger widows, for whenever their physical desires lead them away from Christ, they want to marry, 12 thus incurring condemnation because they have broken their former pledge. 13 And at the same time also, going around from house to house, they learn to be idle, and not only idle, but also gossipy and busybodies, saying the things that are not necessary. 14 Therefore I want younger widows to marry, to bear children, to manage a household, to give the adversary no opportunity for reproach. 15 For already some have turned away and followed after Satan. 16 If any believing woman has widows, she must help them, and the church must not be burdened, in order that it may help those who are truly widows. 
Honoring Worthy Elders and Dealing With Sinners
17 The elders who lead well must be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor by speaking and teaching. 18 For the scripture says, “You must not muzzle an ox while it﻿* is threshing,” and “The worker is worthy of his wages.” 19 Do not accept an accusation against an elder except on the evidence of two or three witnesses. 20 Reprove those who sin in the presence of all, in order that the rest also may experience fear. 21 I testify solemnly before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels that you observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing according to partiality. 22 Lay hands on no one hastily, and do not participate in the sins of others. Keep yourself pure. 23 (No longer drink only water, but use a little wine for your stomach and your frequent illnesses.) 24 The sins of some people are evident, preceding them to judgment, but for some also they follow after them. 25 Likewise also good works are evident, and those considered otherwise are not able to be hidden. 
Slaves and Masters
6 All those who are under the yoke as slaves must regard their own masters as worthy of all honor, lest the name of God and the teaching be slandered. 2 And those who have believing masters must not look down on them because they are brothers, but rather they must serve, because those who benefit by their service are believers and dearly loved. 
False Teachers and the Love of Money
Teach and encourage these things. 3 If anyone teaches other doctrine and does not devote himself to the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the teaching that is in accordance with godliness, 4 he is conceited, understanding nothing, but having a morbid interest concerning controversies and disputes about words, from which come envy, strife, slanders, evil suspicions, 5 constant wrangling by people of depraved mind and deprived of the truth, who consider godliness to be a means of gain. 6 But godliness with contentment is a great means of gain. 7 For we have brought nothing into the world, so that neither can we bring anything out. 8 But if we﻿* have food and clothing, with these things we will be content. 9 But those who want to be rich fall into temptation and a trap and many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge those people into ruin and destruction. 10 For the love of money is a root of all evil, by which some, because they﻿* desire it, have gone astray from the faith and have pierced themselves with many pains. 
Renewed Charge to Timothy
11 But you, O man of God, flee from these things, and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patient endurance, gentleness. 12 Fight the good fight of the faith; take hold of the eternal life to which you were called, and confessed the good confession in the presence of many witnesses. 13 I command you, in the sight of God who gives life to all things and Christ Jesus who testified the good confession before Pontius Pilate, 14 that you observe the commandment without fault, irreproachable until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 15 which he will make known in his own time, the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of those who reign as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords, 16 the one who alone possesses immortality, who lives in unapproachable light, whom no human being has seen nor is able to see, to whom be honor and eternal power. Amen. 
Instructions to the Rich
17 Command those who are rich in this present age not to be proud and not to put their hope in the uncertainty of riches, but in God, who provides us all things richly for enjoyment, 18 to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous, sharing freely, 19 storing up for themselves a good foundation for the future, in order that they may take hold of what is truly life. 
Final Charge and Benediction
20 O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Turn away from pointless empty talk and contradictions of what is falsely called knowledge, 21 which some, by﻿* professing it, have deviated concerning the faith. Grace be with you all.

THE SECOND LETTER OF PAUL TO TIMOTHY
 
Greeting
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus, 2 to Timothy, my dear child. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Timothy’s Spiritual Heritage
3 ⌊I am thankful⌋ to God, whom I have served with a clear conscience ⌊as my ancestors did⌋, when ⌊I remember you constantly⌋ in my prayers night and day, 4 longing to see you as I﻿* remember your tears, so that I may be filled with joy, 5 ⌊remembering the⌋ sincere faith in you, which lived first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and I am convinced that is in you also, 6 for which reason I remind you to rekindle the gift of God that is in you through the laying on of my hands. 7 For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power and love and self-discipline. 
Exhortation to Share Paul’s Suffering
8 Therefore, do not be ashamed of the testimony about our Lord, nor me his prisoner, but suffer along with me for the gospel, according to the power of God, 9 who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works but according to his own purpose and grace that was given to us in Christ Jesus ⌊before time began⌋, 10 but has now been disclosed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death and brought to light life and immortality through the gospel, 11 for which I was appointed a proclaimer and an apostle and a teacher, 12 for which reason also I suffer these things. But I am not ashamed, because I know in whom I have believed, and I am convinced that he is able to guard what I have entrusted until that day. 13 Hold fast to the pattern of sound words which you heard from me, in the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. 14 Guard the good deposit through the Holy Spirit who lives in us. 
15 You know this, that all those in Asia turned away from me, among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes. 16 May the Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he refreshed me many times, and was not ashamed of my imprisonment, 17 but when he﻿* was in Rome, he diligently sought me and found me. 18 May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord in that day! And how much he served me in Ephesus you know very well. 
Exhortation to Be Strong in Grace
2 You, therefore, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 and the things which you have heard from me in the presence of many witnesses, entrust these things to faithful people who will be competent to teach others also. 3 Suffer together with me as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. 4 No one who serves as a soldier is entangled in the activities of everyday life, so that he may please the one who enlisted him. 5 And also if anyone competes he is not crowned unless he competes according to the rules. 6 The farmer who works hard must be the first to receive a share of the crops. 7 Consider what I am saying, for the Lord will grant you understanding in all these things. 
A Trustworthy Saying
8 Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David according to my gospel, 9 in connection with which I suffer misfortune to the point of ⌊imprisonment⌋ as a criminal, but the word of God is not bound. 10 Because of this, I endure all things for the sake of the chosen, in order that they also may obtain salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 11 The saying is trustworthy: 
For if we died with him, we will also live with him; 
12 if we endure, we will also reign with him; 
if we deny him, he also will deny us; 
13 if we are unfaithful, he remains faithful—⌊he cannot deny himself⌋. 
A Worker Approved to God and Not Ashamed
14 Remind people of these things, solemnly urging them before the Lord not to dispute about words. This is in no way beneficial and leads to the ruin of the hearers. 15 Make every effort to present yourself approved to God, a worker having no need to be ashamed, guiding the word of truth along a straight path. 16 But avoid pointless chatter, for it will progress to greater ungodliness, 17 and their message ⌊will spread⌋ like gangrene, among whom are Hymenaeus and Philetus, 18 who have deviated concerning the truth by﻿* saying the resurrection has already taken place, and they are upsetting the faith of some. 19 However, the solid foundation of God stands firm, having this seal: “The Lord knows those who are his,” and “Everyone who names the name of the Lord must abstain from unrighteousness.” 
20 Now in a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthenware ones, some of which are for honorable use, and some of which are for ordinary use. 21 Therefore, if someone cleanses himself from these things, he will be a vessel for honorable use, set apart, useful to the Master, prepared for every good work. 
22 But flee from youthful desires, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, in company with those who call upon the Lord from a pure heart. 23 But avoid foolish and uninformed controversies, because you﻿* know that they produce quarrels. 24 And the slave of the Lord must not quarrel, but be kind toward everyone, skillful in teaching, tolerant, 25 correcting those who are opposed with gentleness, seeing whether perhaps God may grant them repentance to a knowledge of the truth, 26 and they will come to their senses again and escape from the trap of the devil, being held captive by him to do his will. 
Difficult Times Ahead in the Last Days
3 But know this, that in the last days difficult times will come, 2 for people will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boasters, arrogant, slanderers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy, 3 hardhearted, irreconcilable, slanderous, without self-control, savage, with no interest for what is good, 4 traitors, reckless, conceited, loving pleasure rather than loving God, 5 maintaining a form of godliness, but denying its power. Avoid these people. 6 For from these are those who slip into houses and captivate foolish women loaded down with sins, led by various kinds of desires, 7 always learning and never able to come to a knowledge of the truth. 8 And ⌊just as⌋ Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also these oppose the truth, people corrupted in mind, disqualified concerning the faith. 9 But they will not progress to a greater extent, for their folly will be quite evident to everyone, as also the folly of those two was. 
The Value of the Scriptures
10 But you have faithfully followed my teaching, way of life, purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance, 11 persecutions, and sufferings that happened to me in Antioch, in Iconium, and in Lystra, what sort of persecutions I endured, and the Lord delivered me from all of them. 12 And indeed, all those who want to live in a godly manner in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. 13 But evil people and imposters will progress to the worse, deceiving and being deceived. 14 But you continue in the things which you have learned and are convinced of, because you﻿* know from whom you learned them, 15 and that from childhood you have known the holy writings that are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. 16 All scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training in righteousness, 17 in order that the person of God may be competent, equipped for every good work. 
Paul’s Charge to Timothy
4 I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is going to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom, 2 preach the word, be ready in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all patience and instruction. 3 For there will be a time when they will not put up with sound teaching, but in accordance with their own desires, they will accumulate for themselves teachers, ⌊because they have an insatiable curiosity⌋, 4 and they will turn away from the hearing of the truth, but will turn to myths. 5 But you, be self-controlled in all things, bear hardship patiently, do the work of an evangelist, fulfill your ministry. 
6 For I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the time of my departure is imminent. 7 I have fought the good fight, I have completed the race, I have kept the faith. 8 Finally, the crown of righteousness is reserved for me, that the Lord, the righteous Judge, will award to me on that day, and not only to me, but also to all who have loved his appearing. 
Final Instructions to Timothy
9 Make haste to come to me quickly. 10 For Demas deserted me, because he﻿* loved the present age, and went to Thessalonica. Crescens went to Galatia; Titus went to Dalmatia. 11 Luke alone is with me. Take along Mark and﻿* bring him with you, because he is useful to me for ministry. 12 But I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus. 13 When you﻿* come, bring the cloak that I left behind in Troas with Carpus, and the scrolls, especially the parchments. 14 Alexander the metalworker did me much harm; may the Lord pay back to him according to his deeds, 15 against whom you also be on guard, because he vehemently opposed our words. 16 At my first defense, no one came to my aid, but they all deserted me; may it not be counted against them. 17 But the Lord helped me and strengthened me, so that through me the proclamation might be fulfilled and all the Gentiles might hear, and he rescued me from the lion’s mouth. 18 The Lord will rescue me from every evil deed, and will save me for his heavenly kingdom, to whom be the glory ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen. 
Final Greetings and Benediction
19 Greet Prisca and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus. 20 Erastus remained in Corinth, but Trophimus I left behind in Miletus because he﻿* was sick. 21 Make haste to come before winter. Eubulus and Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers greet you. 22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO TITUS
 
Greeting
1 Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ for the faith of the chosen of God and the knowledge of the truth that is according to godliness, 2 in the hope of eternal life which God, who does not lie, promised before eternal ages, 3 but at the proper time has disclosed his message in the proclamation with which I was entrusted according to the command of God our Savior, 4 to Titus, my true child according to a common faith. Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior. 
Instructions to Titus in Crete
5 On account of this, I left you behind in Crete, in order that what remains may be set in order and you may appoint elders in every town, as I ordered you. 6 If anyone is blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not ⌊accused of dissipation⌋ or rebellious. 7 For it is necessary for the overseer to be blameless as God’s steward, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not addicted to wine, not violent, not greedy for dishonest gain, 8 but hospitable, loving what is good, prudent, just, devout, self-controlled, 9 holding fast to the faithful message according to the teaching, in order that he may be able both to exhort with sound instruction and to reprove those who speak against it. 
10 For there are many rebellious people, idle talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision, 11 whom it is necessary to silence, whoever are ruining whole families by﻿* teaching things which must not be taught for the sake of dishonest gain. 12 A certain one of them, one of their own prophets, has said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.” 13 This testimony is true, for which reason reprove them severely, in order that they may be sound in the faith, 14 not paying attention to Jewish myths and commandments of people who turn away from the truth. 15 To the pure all things are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both their mind and conscience are defiled. 16 They profess to know God, but by their deeds they deny him, because they﻿* are detestable and disobedient, and unfit for every good deed. 
Sound Instruction and Consistent Behavior
2 But you, speak the things which are fitting for sound instruction. 2 Older men are to be temperate, worthy of respect, self-controlled, sound in faith, in love, and in endurance. 3 Older women likewise are to be reverent in their behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to much wine, teaching what is good, 4 in order that they may encourage the young women to love their husbands and to love their children, 5 to be self-controlled, pure, busy at home, good, being subject to their own husbands, in order that the word of God may not be slandered. 6 Likewise, exhort the young men to be self-controlled, 7 concerning everything showing yourself to be an example of good deeds, in your teaching demonstrating soundness, dignity, 8 a sound message beyond reproach, in order that ⌊an opponent⌋ may be put to shame, because he﻿* has nothing bad to say concerning us. 
9 Slaves must be subject to their own masters in everything, to be well-pleasing, not to talk back, 10 not stealing, but demonstrating all good faith, in order that they may do credit to the teaching of God our Savior in everything. 11 For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all people, 12 training us in order that, denying impiety and worldly desires, we may live self-controlled and righteously and godly in the present age, 13 looking forward to the blessed hope and the glorious appearing of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ, 14 who gave himself for us, in order that he might redeem us from all lawlessness and purify for himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good deeds. 15 Speak these things and exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no one disregard you. 
Conduct Toward All People
3 Remind them to be subject to the rulers and to the authorities, to obey, to be prepared for every good work, 2 to speak evil of no one, to be peaceable, gentle, showing all courtesy to all people. 3 For we also were once foolish, disobedient, led astray, enslaved to various desires and pleasures, spending our lives in wickedness and envy, despicable, hating one another. 4 But when the kindness and love for mankind of God our Savior appeared, 5 he saved us, not by deeds of righteousness that we have done, but because of his mercy, through the washing of regeneration and renewal by the Holy Spirit, 6 whom he poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, 7 so that, having been justified by his grace, we may become heirs according to the hope of eternal life. 
Final Instructions to Titus
8 The saying is trustworthy, and I want you to insist concerning these things, so that those who have believed in God may be careful to engage in good deeds. These things are good and beneficial for people. 9 But avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and contentions and quarrels about the law, for they are useless and fruitless. 10 Reject a divisive person after a first and second admonition, 11 knowing that such a person is perverted and is sinning, being self-condemned. 
12 When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, make haste to come to me in Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there. 13 Diligently send on their way Zenas the lawyer and Apollos, so that ⌊they may lack nothing⌋. 14 But also our people must learn to engage in good deeds for necessary needs, so that they will not be unfruitful. 15 All those with me greet you. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with all of you.

THE LETTER OF PAUL TO PHILEMON
 
Greeting
1 Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our dear friend and fellow worker, 2 and to Apphia our sister, and to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church in your house. 3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Thanksgiving and Prayer for Philemon
4 I thank my God, always making mention of you in my prayers, 5 because I﻿* hear about your love and faith which you have toward the Lord Jesus and for all the saints. 6 I pray that the fellowship of your faith may become effective in the knowledge of every good thing that is in us for Christ. 7 For I have great joy and encouragement from your love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother. 
Paul’s Appeal for Onesimus
8 Therefore, although I﻿* have great confidence in Christ to order you to do what is proper, 9 instead I appeal to you because of love, since I﻿* am such a one as Paul, now an old man and also a prisoner of Christ Jesus. 10 I am appealing to you concerning my child whom I became the father of during my imprisonment, Onesimus. 11 Once he was useless to you, but now he is useful to you and to me, 12 whom I have sent back to you himself, that is, my heart, 13 whom I wanted to keep with me, in order that he might serve me on behalf of you during my imprisonment for the gospel. 14 But apart from your consent, I wanted to do nothing, in order that your good deed might be not as according to necessity, but according to your own free will. 15 For perhaps because of this, he was separated from you for a time, in order that you might have him back forever, 16 no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, a beloved brother, especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord. 
Paul’s Request to Philemon
17 If therefore you consider me a partner, receive him as you would me. 18 But if in anything he has caused you loss or owes you anything, ⌊charge this to my account⌋. 19 I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will pay it back, lest I mention to you that ⌊you owe me even your very self besides⌋. 20 Yes, brother, I ought to have some benefit of you in the Lord; refresh my heart in Christ. 
21 Confident of your obedience, I am writing to you because I﻿* know that you will do even beyond what I say. 22 At the same time also, prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you. 
Final Greetings and Benediction
23 Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you, 24 and so do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers. 25 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

THE LETTER TO THE HEBREWS
 
God’s Full and Final Revelation in the Son
1 Although﻿* God spoke long ago in many parts and in many ways to the fathers by the prophets, 2 in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the world, 3 who is the radiance of his glory and the representation of his essence, sustaining all things by the word of power. When he﻿* had made purification for sins through him, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, 4 having become by so much better than the angels, by as much as he has inherited a more excellent name than theirs. 
The Son Superior to the Angels
5 For to which of the angels did he ever say, 
“You are my son, 
today I have begotten you,” 
and again, 
“I will be ⌊his father⌋, 
and he will be ⌊my son⌋”? 
6 And again, when he brings the firstborn into the world, he says, 
“And let all the angels of God worship him.” 
7 And concerning the angels he says, 
“The one who makes his angels winds, 
and his servants a flame of fire,” 
8 but concerning the Son, 
“Your throne, O God, is ⌊forever and ever⌋, 
and the scepter of righteous is the scepter of your kingdom. 
9 You have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness; 
because of this God, your God, has anointed you 
with the olive oil of joy more than your companions. 
10 And, 
“You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning, 
and the heavens are the works of your hands; 
11 they will perish, but you continue, 
and they will all become old like a garment, 
12 and like a robe you will roll them up, 
and like a garment they will be changed; 
but you are the same, and your years will not run out.” 
13 But to which of the angels has he ever said, 
“Sit down at my right hand, 
until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.” 
14 Are they not all spirits engaged in special service, sent on assignment for the sake of those who are going to inherit salvation? 
Warning Not to Neglect Salvation
2 Because of this, it is all the more necessary that we pay attention to the things we have heard, lest we drift away. 2 For if the word spoken through angels was binding and every transgression and act of disobedience received a just penalty, 3 how will we escape if we﻿* neglect so great a salvation which had its beginning when it﻿* was spoken through the Lord and was confirmed to us by those who heard, 4 while﻿* God was testifying at the same time by signs and wonders and various miracles and distributions of the Holy Spirit according to his will. 
The Son’s Humiliation and Suffering
5 For he did not subject to angels the world to come, about which we are speaking. 6 But someone testified somewhere, saying, 
“What is man, that you remember him, 
or the son of man, that you care for him? 
7 You made him for a short time lower than the angels; 
you crowned him with glory and honor; 
8 you subjected all things under his feet. 
For in subjecting all things, he left nothing that was not subject to him. But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him, 9 but we see Jesus, for a short time made lower than the angels, because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, so that apart from God he might taste death on behalf of everyone. 10 For it was fitting for him for whom are all things and through whom are all things in bringing many sons to glory to perfect the originator of their salvation through sufferings. 11 For both the one who sanctifies and the ones who are sanctified are all from one, for which reason he is not ashamed to call them brothers, 12 saying, 
“I will proclaim your name to my brothers; 
in the midst of the assembly I will sing in praise of you.” 
13 And again, 
“I will trust in him.” 
And again, 
“Behold, I and the children God has given me.” 
14 Therefore, since the children share in blood and flesh, he also in like manner shared in these same things, in order that through death he could destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, 15 and could set free these who through fear of death were subject to slavery throughout all their lives. 16 For surely he is not concerned with angels, but he is concerned with the descendants of Abraham. 17 Therefore he was obligated to be made like his brothers in all respects, in order that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest in the things relating to God, in order to make atonement for the sins of the people. 18 For in that which he himself suffered when he﻿* was tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted. 
The Superiority of Jesus to Moses
3 Therefore, holy brothers, sharers in a heavenly calling, consider Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession, 2 who was faithful to the one who appointed him, as Moses also was in his household. 3 For this one is considered worthy of greater glory than Moses, inasmuch as the one who builds it has greater honor than the house. 4 For every house is built by someone, but the one who built all things is God. 5 And Moses was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony to the things that would be spoken, 6 but Christ was faithful﻿* as a son over his house, whose house we are, if we hold fast to our confidence and the hope we can be proud of. 
A Serious Warning Against Unbelief
7 Therefore, just as the Holy Spirit says, 
“Today, if you hear his voice, 
8 do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, 
in the day of testing in the wilderness, 
9 where your fathers tested me by trial 
and saw my works 10 for forty years. 
Therefore I was angry with this generation, 
and I said, ‘They always go astray in their heart, 
and they do not know my ways.’ 
11 As I swore in my anger, 
‘⌊They will never enter⌋ into my rest.’ ” 
12 Watch out, brothers, lest there be in some of you an evil, unbelieving heart, with the result that you fall away﻿* from the living God. 13 But encourage one another ⌊day by day⌋, as long as it is called “today,” so that ⌊none of you become hardened⌋ by the deception of sin. 14 For we have become partners of Christ, if indeed we hold fast the beginning of our commitment steadfast until the end, 15 ⌊while it is said⌋, 
“Today, if you hear his voice, 
do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.” 
16 For who, when they﻿* heard it, were disobedient? Surely it was not all who went out from Egypt through Moses? 17 And with whom was he angry for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose dead bodies fell in the wilderness? 18 And to whom did he swear they would not enter into his rest, except those who were disobedient? 19 And so we see that they were not able to enter because of unbelief. 
The Rest that Remains for the People of God
4 Therefore let us fear, while there﻿* remains a promise of entering into his rest, that none of you appear to fall short of it. 2 ⌊For we also have had the good news proclaimed to us⌋, just as those also did, but the message ⌊they heard⌋ did not benefit them, because they﻿* were not united with those who heard it in faith. 3 For we who have believed enter into rest, just as he has said, 
“As I swore in my anger, 
‘⌊They will never enter⌋ into my rest.’ ” 
And yet these works have been accomplished from the foundation of the world. 4 For he has spoken somewhere about the seventh day in this way: “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,” 5 and in this passage again, ‘⌊They will never enter⌋ into my rest.’ ” 6 Since therefore it remains for some to enter into it, and the ones to whom the good news was proclaimed previously did not enter because of disobedience, 7 again he ordains a certain day, today, speaking by David after so long a time, just as had been said before, 
“Today, if you hear his voice, 
do not harden your hearts.” 
8 For if Joshua had caused them to rest, he would not have spoken about another day after these things. 9 Consequently a sabbath rest remains for the people of God. 10 For the one who has entered into his rest has also himself rested from his works, just as God did from his own works. 
11 Therefore, let us make every effort to enter into that rest, in order that no one may fall in the same pattern of disobedience. 12 For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any double-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit, both joints and marrow, and able to judge the reflections and thoughts of the heart. 13 And no creature is hidden in the sight of him, but all things are naked and laid bare to the eyes of him to whom ⌊we must give our account⌋. 
Jesus Our Great High Priest
14 Therefore, because we have a great high priest who has gone through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast to our confession. 15 For we do not have a high priest who is not able to sympathize with our weaknesses, but who has been tempted in all things in the same way, without sin. 16 Therefore let us approach with confidence to the throne of grace, in order that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need. 
A High Priest Like Melchizedek
5 For every high priest taken from among men is appointed on behalf of people in the things relating to God, in order that he can offer both gifts and sacrifices on behalf of sins, 2 being able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and led astray, since he himself also is surrounded by weakness, 3 and because of it he is obligated to offer sacrifices for sins ⌊for himself also, as well as for the people⌋. 4 And someone does not take for himself the honor, but is called by God, just as Aaron also was. 5 Thus also Christ did not glorify himself to become high priest, but the one who said to him, 
“You are my Son, today I have begotten you,” 
6 just as also in another place he says, 
“You are a priest ⌊forever⌋ according to the order of Melchizedek,” 
7 who in the days of his flesh offered up both prayers and supplications, with loud crying and tears, to the one who was able to save him from death, and he was heard as a result of his reverence. 8 Although he was a son, he learned obedience from what he suffered, 9 and being perfected, he became the source of eternal salvation to all those who obey him, 10 being designated by God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek. 
Advanced Teaching Hindered by Immaturity
11 Concerning this ⌊we have much to say and it is difficult to explain⌋, since you have become sluggish in hearing. 12 For indeed, although you﻿* ought to be teachers ⌊by this time⌋, you have need of someone to teach you again the beginning elements of the oracles of God, and ⌊you have need of⌋ milk, not solid food. 13 For everyone who partakes of milk is unacquainted with the message of righteousness, because he is an infant. 14 But solid food is for the mature, who because of practice have trained their faculties for the distinguishing of both good and evil. 
A Serious Warning Against Falling Away
6 Therefore, leaving behind the elementary message about Christ, let us move on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works and faith in God, 2 teaching about baptisms and laying on of hands, and resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment. 3 And this we will do, if God permits. 4 For it is impossible concerning those who have once been enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and become sharers of the Holy Spirit, 5 and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the coming age, 6 and having fallen away, to renew them again to repentance, because they﻿* have crucified again for themselves the Son of God and held him up to contempt. 7 For ground that drinks the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth vegetation usable to those people ⌊for whose sake⌋ it is also cultivated, shares a blessing from God. 8 But if it﻿* produces thorns and thistles, it is worthless and near to a curse, whose end is for burning. 
9 But even if we are speaking in this way, dear friends, we are convinced of better things concerning you, and belonging to salvation. 10 For God is not unjust, so as to forget your work and the love which you demonstrated for his name by﻿* having served the saints, and continuing to serve them. 11 And we desire each one of you to demonstrate the same diligence for the full assurance of your hope until the end, 12 in order that you may not be sluggish, but imitators of those who inherit the promises through faith and patience. 
The Reliability of God’s Promise
13 For when﻿* God made a promise to Abraham, since he had no one greater to swear by, he swore by himself, 14 saying, 
“Surely ⌊I will greatly bless⌋ you, and ⌊I will greatly multiply⌋ you.” 
15 And so, by﻿* persevering, he obtained the promise. 16 For people swear by what is greater than themselves, and the oath for confirmation is the end of all dispute for them. 17 In the same way God, because he﻿* wanted to show even more to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his resolve, guaranteed it with an oath, 18 in order that through two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have taken refuge may have powerful encouragement to hold fast to the hope set before us, 19 which we have like an anchor of the soul, both firm and steadfast, and entering into the inside of the curtain, 20 where Jesus, the forerunner for us, entered, because he﻿* became a high priest ⌊forever⌋ according to the order of Melchizedek. 
The Greatness of Melchizedek
7 For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham as he﻿* was returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him, 2 to whom also Abraham apportioned a tenth of everything—in the first place, his name is translated “king of righteousness,” and then also “king of Salem,” that is, “king of peace”; 3 without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but resembling the Son of God—he remains a priest for all time. 
4 But see how great this man was, to whom Abraham the patriarch gave a tenth from the spoils! 5 And indeed those of the sons of Levi who receive the priesthood have a commandment to collect a tenth from the people according to the law, that is, from their brothers, although ⌊they are descended from Abraham⌋. 6 But the one who did not trace his descent from them collected tithes from Abraham and blessed the one who had the promises. 7 Now without any dispute the inferior is blessed by the more prominent. 8 And in this case mortal men receive tithes, but in that case it is testified that he lives. 9 And, ⌊so to speak⌋, even Levi, the one who receives tithes, has paid tithes through Abraham. 10 For he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him. 
The Superiority of Jesus to Melchizedek
11 Thus if perfection was through the Levitical priesthood, for on the basis of it the people received the law, what further need is there for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek and not said to be according to the order of Aaron? 12 For when﻿* the priesthood changes, of necessity there is a change of the law also. 13 For the one about whom these things are spoken belongs to another tribe from which no one has officiated at the altar. 14 For it is evident that our Lord is a descendant of Judah, a tribe with reference to which Moses said nothing concerning priests. 15 And it is still more clear, if another priest according to the likeness of Melchizedek arises, 16 who has become a priest not according to a law of physical requirement, but according to the power of an indestructible life. 17 For it is testified, 
“You are a priest ⌊forever⌋ according to the order of Melchizedek.” 
18 For on the one hand a preceding commandment is set aside because of its weakness and uselessness 19 (for the law made nothing perfect), but on the other hand there is the introduction of a better hope through which we draw near to God. 20 And by as much as this was not without an oath (for these on the one hand ⌊have become priests⌋ without an oath, 21 but he with an oath by the one who said to him, 
“The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind, 
‘You are a priest ⌊forever⌋’ ”), 
22 by so much more Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant. 
23 And indeed many ⌊have become⌋ priests, because they were prevented by death from continuing in office, 24 but he, because he continues ⌊forever⌋, holds the priesthood permanently. 25 Therefore also he is able to save completely those who draw near to God through him, because he﻿* always lives in order to intercede on their behalf. 
26 For a high priest such as this indeed is fitting for us, holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, and having become exalted above the heavens, 27 who does not ⌊need every day⌋ like the former high priests to offer up sacrifices for his own sins and then for the sins of the people, because he did this once for all when he﻿* offered up himself. 28 For the law appoints men as high priests who have weakness, but the statement of the oath, after the law, appoints a Son, who is made perfect ⌊forever⌋. 
The Mediator of a New and Better Covenant
8 Now this is the main point in what has been said: we have a high priest such as this, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven, 2 a minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord set up, not man. 3 For every high priest is appointed in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices; therefore it was﻿* necessary for this one also to have something that he offers. 4 Now if he were on earth, he would not even be a priest, because there﻿* are those who offer the gifts according to the law, 5 who serve a sketch and shadow of the heavenly things, just as Moses was warned when he﻿* was about to complete the tabernacle, for he says, “See to it that you make everything according to the pattern which was shown to you on the mountain.” 6 But now he has attained a more excellent ministry, by as much as he is also mediator of a better covenant which has been enacted upon better promises. 7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, occasion would not have been sought for a second. 8 For in finding fault with them he says, 
“Behold, days are coming, says the Lord, 
when I will complete a new covenant with the house of Israel 
and with the house of Judah, 
9 not like the covenant which I made with their fathers 
on the day I took hold of them by my hand 
to lead them out of the land of Egypt, 
because they did not continue in my covenant 
and I disregarded them, says the Lord. 
10 For this is the covenant that I will decree with the house of Israel 
after those days, says the Lord: 
I am putting my laws in their minds 
and I will write them on their hearts, 
and I will be ⌊their⌋ God 
and they will be ⌊my⌋ people. 
11 And they will not teach each one his fellow citizen 
and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ 
because they will all know me, 
from the least of them to the greatest. 
12 For I will be merciful toward their wrongdoings, 
and I will not remember their sins any longer.” 
13 In calling it new, he has declared the former to be old. Now what is becoming obsolete and growing old is near to disappearing. 
The Earthly Ministry of the Old Covenant
9 Now the first covenant had regulations for worship and the earthly sanctuary. 2 For a tent was prepared, the first one, in which were the lampstand and the table and the presentation of the loaves, which is called the holy place. 3 And after the second curtain was a tent called the holy of holies, 4 containing the golden incense altar and the ark of the covenant covered on all sides with gold, in which were a golden jar containing the manna and the rod of Aaron that budded and the tablets of the covenant. 5 And above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat, about which it is not now possible to speak in detail. 
6 Now these things having been prepared in this way, the priests enter into the first tent ⌊continually⌋ as they﻿* accomplish their service, 7 but only the high priest enters into the second tent once a year, not without blood, which he offers on behalf of himself and the sins of the people committed in ignorance. 8 The Holy Spirit was making this clear, that the way into the holy place was not yet revealed, while﻿* the first tent was still in existence, 9 which was a symbol for the present time, in which both the gifts and sacrifices which were offered were not able to perfect the worshiper with respect to the conscience, 10 concerning instead only food and drink and different washings, regulations of outward things imposed until the time of setting things right. 
The Heavenly Ministry of the New Covenant
11 But Christ has arrived as a high priest of the good things to come. Through the greater and more perfect tent not made by hands, that is, not of this creation, 12 and not by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, he entered once for all into the most holy place, obtaining eternal redemption. 13 For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a young cow sprinkled on those who are defiled sanctify them for the ritual purity of the flesh, 14 how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works to serve the living God? 
15 And because of this, he is the mediator of a new covenant, in order that, because﻿* a death has taken place for the redemption of transgressions committed during the first covenant, those who are the called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. 16 For where there is a will, it is a necessity for the death of the one who made the will to be established. 17 For a will is in force concerning those who are dead, since it is never in force when the one who made the will is alive. 18 Therefore not even the first covenant was ratified without blood. 19 For when﻿* every commandment had been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves with water and scarlet wool and hyssop and sprinkled both the scroll itself and all the people, 20 saying, 
“This is the blood of the covenant that God has commanded for you.” 
21 And likewise he sprinkled both the tabernacle and all the utensils of service with the blood. 22 Indeed, nearly everything is purified with blood according to the law, and apart from the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness. 
23 Therefore it was necessary for the sketches of the things in heaven to be purified with these sacrifices, but the heavenly things themselves to be purified with better sacrifices than these. 24 For Christ did not enter into a sanctuary made by hands, a mere copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf, 25 and not in order that he can offer himself many times, as the high priest enters into the sanctuary ⌊year by year⌋ with blood not his own, 26 since it would have been necessary for him to suffer many times from the foundation of the world, but now he has appeared once at the end of the ages for the removal of sin by the sacrifice of himself. 27 And ⌊just as⌋ it is destined for people to die once, and after this, judgment, 28 thus also Christ, having been offered once in order to bear the sins of many, will appear for the second time without reference to sin to those who eagerly await him for salvation. 
Christ’s One Sacrifice for Sin
10 For the law, possessing a shadow of the good things that are about to come, not the form of things itself, is never able ⌊year by year⌋ by means of the same sacrifices which they offer without interruption to make perfect those who draw near. 2 For otherwise, would they not have ceased to be offered, because the ones who worship, having been purified once and for all, would no longer have any consciousness of sins? 3 But in them there is a reminder of sins ⌊year by year⌋. 4 For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. 
5 Therefore, when he﻿* came into the world, he said, 
“Sacrifice and offering you did not want, 
but a body you prepared for me; 
6 you did not delight in whole burnt offerings and offerings for sins. 
7 Then I said, ‘Behold, I have come— 
in the roll of the book it is written about me— 
to do your will, O God.’ 
8 When he says above, 
“Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and offerings for sin 
you did not want, nor did you delight in,” 
which are offered according to the law, 9 then he has said, 
“Behold, I have come to do your will.” 
He takes away the first in order to establish the second, 10 by which will we are made holy through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. 
11 And every priest stands every day serving and offering the same sacrifices many times, which are never able to take away sins. 12 But this one, after he﻿* had offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, sat down at the right hand of God, 13 from now on waiting until his enemies are made a footstool for his feet. 14 For by one offering he has perfected for all time those who are made holy. 15 And the Holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying, 
16 “This is the covenant that I will decree for them 
after those days, says the Lord: 
I am putting my laws on their hearts, 
and I will write them on their minds.” 
17 He also says, 
“Their sins and their lawless deeds I will never remember again.” 
18 Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer an offering for sin. 
Hold Fast the Confession of Our Hope
19 Therefore, brothers, since we﻿* have confidence for the entrance into the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus, 20 by the new and living way which he inaugurated for us through the curtain, that is, his flesh, 21 and since we have a great priest over the house of God, 22 let us approach with a true heart in the full assurance of faith, our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water. 23 Let us hold fast to the confession of our hope without wavering, for the one who promised is faithful. 24 And let us think about ⌊how to stir one another up to love⌋ and good works, 25 not abandoning ⌊our meeting together⌋, as is the habit of some, but encouraging each other, and by so much more as you see the day drawing near. 
A Serious Warning Against Continuing Deliberate Sin
26 For if﻿* we keep on sinning deliberately after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, 27 but a certain fearful expectation of judgment and a fury of fire that is about to consume the adversaries. 28 Anyone who rejected the law of Moses dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses. 29 How much worse punishment do you think the person will be considered worthy of who treats with disdain the Son of God and who considers ordinary the blood of the covenant by which he was made holy and who insults the Spirit of grace? 30 For we know the one who said, 
“Vengeance is mine, I will repay,” 
and again, 
“The Lord will judge his people.” 
31 It is a terrifying thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 
32 But remember the former days in which, after you﻿* were enlightened, you endured a great struggle with sufferings, 33 sometimes being publicly exposed both to insults and to afflictions, and sometimes becoming sharers with those who were treated in this way. 34 For you both sympathized with the prisoners and put up with the seizure of your belongings with joy because you﻿* knew that you yourselves had a better and permanent possession. 35 Therefore do not throw away your confidence, which has great reward. 36 For you have need of endurance, in order that after you﻿* have done the will of God, you may receive what was promised. 37 For yet 
“a very, very little while, 
and the one who is coming will come and will not delay. 
38 But my righteous one will live by faith, 
and if he shrinks back, my soul is not well pleased with him.” 
39 But we are not among those who shrink back to destruction, but among those who have faith to the preservation of our souls. 
Examples of Faith in Action
11 Now faith is the realization of what is hoped for, the proof of things not seen. 2 For by this the people of old were approved. 3 By faith we understand the worlds were created by the word of God, in order that what is seen did not come into existence from what is visible. 
4 By faith Abel offered to God a greater sacrifice than Cain, by which he was approved that he was righteous, because﻿* God approved him for his gifts, and through it he still speaks, although he﻿* is dead. 5 By faith Enoch was taken up, so that he did not experience death, and he was not found, because God took him up. For before his removal, he had been approved ⌊as having been pleasing⌋ to God. 6 Now without faith it is impossible to please him, for the one who approaches God must believe that he exists and is a rewarder of those who seek him. 7 By faith Noah, having been warned about things not yet seen, out of reverence constructed an ark for the deliverance of his family, by which he pronounced sentence on the world and became an heir of the righteousness that comes by faith. 
8 By faith Abraham, when he﻿* was called, obeyed to go out to a place that he was going to receive for an inheritance, and he went out, not knowing where he was going. 9 By faith he lived in the land of promise as a stranger, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the fellow heirs of the same promise. 10 For he was expecting the city that has foundations, whose architect and builder is God. 11 By faith also, ⌊with Sarah⌋, he received ⌊the ability to procreate⌋ even ⌊past the normal age⌋, because he regarded the one who had promised to be faithful. 12 And therefore these were fathered from one man, and he being as good as dead, as the stars of heaven in number and like the innumerable sand by the shore of the sea. 
13 These all died in faith without receiving the promises, but seeing them from a distance and welcoming them, and admitting that they were strangers and temporary residents on the earth. 14 For those who say such things make clear that they are seeking a homeland. 15 And if they remember that land from which they went out, they would have had opportunity to return. 16 But now they aspire to a better land, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a city. 
17 By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered Isaac, and the one who received the promises was ready to offer his one and only son, 18 with reference to whom it was said, “In Isaac your descendants will be named,” 19 having reasoned that God was able even to raise him from the dead, from which he received him back also as a symbol. 20 By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things that were going to happen. 21 By faith Jacob, as he﻿* was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshiped, leaning on the top of his staff. 22 By faith Joseph, as he﻿* was dying, mentioned about the exodus of the sons of Israel and gave instructions about his bones. 
23 By faith Moses, when he﻿* was born, was hidden for three months by his parents, because they saw the child was handsome, and they were not afraid of the edict of the king. 24 By faith Moses, when he﻿* was grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter, 25 choosing instead to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to experience the transitory enjoyment of sin, 26 considering ⌊reproach endured for the sake of Christ⌋ greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking to the reward. 27 By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the anger of the king, for he persevered as if he﻿* saw the invisible one. 28 By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of blood, in order that the one who destroyed the firstborn would not touch them. 29 By faith they crossed the Red Sea as if on dry land; the Egyptians, ⌊when they made the attempt⌋, were drowned. 30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they﻿* had been marched around for seven days. 31 By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who were disobedient, because she﻿* welcomed the spies in peace. 
32 And what more shall I say? For time would fail me to tell about Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, and Samuel and the prophets, 33 who through faith conquered kingdoms, accomplished justice, obtained what was promised, shut the mouths of lions, 34 extinguished the effectiveness of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, were made strong from weakness, became mighty in battle, put to flight enemy battle lines. 35 Women received back their dead by resurrection. But others were tortured, not accepting release, in order that they might gain a better resurrection. 36 And others ⌊experienced mocking and flogging⌋, and in addition bonds and imprisonment. 37 They were stoned, they were sawed in two, they died by murder with a sword, they wandered about in sheepskins, in goatskins, impoverished, afflicted, mistreated, 38 of whom the world was not worthy, wandering about on deserts and mountains and in caves and in holes in the ground. 39 And although they﻿* all were approved through their faith, they did not receive what was promised, 40 because﻿* God had provided something better for us, so that they would not be made perfect without us. 
The Example of Jesus’ Suffering
12 Therefore, since﻿* we also have such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us, putting aside every weight and ⌊the sin that so easily ensnares us⌋, let us run with patient endurance the race that has been set before us, 2 fixing our eyes on Jesus, the originator and perfecter of faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, disregarding the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. 3 For consider the one who endured such hostility by sinners against himself,* so that you will not grow weary in your souls and give up. 4 You have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your﻿* blood as you﻿* struggle against sin. 5 And have you completely forgotten the exhortation which instructs you as sons? 
“My son, do not make light of the Lord’s discipline, 
or give up when you are corrected by him. 
6 For the Lord disciplines the one whom he loves, 
and punishes every son whom he accepts.” 
7 Endure it for discipline. God is dealing with you as sons. For what son is there whom a father does not discipline? 8 But if you are without discipline, in which all legitimate sons﻿* have become participants, then you are illegitimate and not sons. 9 Furthermore, we have had ⌊our earthly fathers⌋ who disciplined us, and we respected them. Will we not much rather subject ourselves to the Father of spirits and live? 10 For they disciplined us for a few days according to what seemed appropriate to them, but he does so for our benefit, in order that we can have a share in his holiness. 11 Now all discipline seems for the moment not to be joyful but painful, but later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness for those who are trained by it. 
A Serious Warning Against Refusing God
12 Therefore strengthen your slackened hands and your weakened knees, 13 and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame will not be dislocated, but rather be healed. 14 Pursue peace with everyone, and holiness, without which no one will see the Lord. 15 Take care that no one falls short of the grace of God; that no one growing up like a root of bitterness causes trouble, and by it many become defiled; 16 that no one be a sexually immoral or totally worldly person like Esau, who for one meal traded his own birthright. 17 For you know that also afterwards, when he﻿* wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, because he did not find an occasion for repentance, although he sought it with tears. 
18 For you have not come to something that can be touched, and to a burning fire, and to darkness, and to gloom, and to a whirlwind, 19 and to the noise of a trumpet, and to the sound of words which those who heard begged that not another word be spoken to them. 20 For they could not endure what was commanded: “If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned.” 21 And the spectacle was so terrifying that Moses said, “I am terrified and trembling.” 22 But you have come to Mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to tens of thousands of angels, to the festal gathering 23 and assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of righteous people made perfect, 24 and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and ⌊to the sprinkled blood⌋ that speaks better than Abel’s does. 
25 Watch out that you do not refuse the one who is speaking! For if those did not escape when they﻿* refused the one who warned them on earth, much less will we escape,* if we﻿* reject the one who warns from heaven, 26 whose voice shook the earth at that time, but now he has promised, saying, 
“Yet once more I will shake not only the earth but also heaven.” 
27 Now the phrase “yet once more” indicates the removal of what is shaken, namely, things that have been created, in order that the things that are not shaken may remain. 28 Therefore, since we﻿* are receiving an unshakable kingdom, let us be thankful, through which let us serve God acceptably, with awe and reverence. 29 For indeed our God is a consuming fire. 
Concluding Ethical Instructions
13 Brotherly love must continue. 2 Do not neglect hospitality, because through this some have received angels as guests without knowing it. 3 Remember the prisoners, as though you were fellow-prisoners; remember﻿* the mistreated, as though you yourselves also are being mistreated﻿* in the body. 4 Marriage must be held in honor by all, and the marriage bed be undefiled, because God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers. 5 Your lifestyle must be free from the love of money, being content with what you have. For he himself has said, “I will never desert you, and I will never abandon you.” 6 So then, we can say with confidence, 
“The Lord is my helper, I will not be afraid. 
What will man do to me?” 
7 Remember your leaders, who spoke the word of God to you; ⌊considering the outcome of their way of life⌋, imitate their faith. 8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and ⌊forever⌋. 9 Do not be carried away by various and strange teachings, for it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not by foods by which those who participate have not benefited. 10 We have an altar from which those who serve in the tabernacle do not have the right to eat. 11 For the bodies of those animals whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sins are burned up outside the camp. 12 Therefore Jesus also suffered outside the gate, in order that he might sanctify the people by his own blood. 13 So we must go out to him outside the camp, bearing his reproach. 14 For here we do not have a permanent city, but we seek the city that is to come. 15 Therefore through him let us offer up a sacrifice of praise ⌊continually⌋ to God, that is, the fruit of lips that confess his name. 16 And do not neglect doing good and generosity, for God is pleased with such sacrifices. 
17 Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your souls as those who will give an account, so that they can do this with joy and not with groaning, for this would be unprofitable for you. 
18 Pray for us, for we are convinced that we have a good conscience, and want to conduct ourselves commendably in every way. 19 And I especially urge you to do this, so that I may be restored to you more quickly. 
Benediction
20 Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the eternal covenant, 21 equip you with every good thing to do his will, carrying out in us what is pleasing before him through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory ⌊forever⌋. Amen. 
Conclusion
22 Now I urge you, brothers, bear with my word of exhortation, for indeed I have written to you ⌊briefly⌋. 23 Know that our brother Timothy has been released, with whom I will see you, if he comes quickly enough. 24 Greet all your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy greet you. 25 Grace be with all of you.

THE LETTER OF JAMES
 
Greeting
1 James, a slave of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes in the dispersion. Greetings! 
Trials, Testing, and Faith
2 Consider it all joy, my brothers, whenever you encounter various trials, 3 because you﻿* know that the testing of your faith produces endurance. 4 And let endurance have its perfect effect, so that you may be mature and complete, lacking in nothing. 
5 Now if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask for it from God, who gives to all without reservation and not reproaching, and it will be given to him. 6 But let him ask for it in faith, without any doubting, for the one who doubts is like the surf of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed about. 7 For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord; 8 he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways. 
9 Now let the brother of humble circumstances boast in his high position, 10 but the rich person in his humiliation, because he will pass away like a flower of the grass. 11 For the sun rises with its burning heat and dries up the grass, and its flower falls off, and the beauty of its appearance is lost. So also the rich person in his pursuits will wither away. 
12 Blessed is the person who endures testing, because when he﻿* is approved he will receive the crown of life that he has promised to those who love him. 13 No one who is being tempted should say, “I am being tempted by God,” for God ⌊cannot be tempted⌋ by evil, and he himself tempts no one. 14 But each one is tempted when he﻿* is dragged away and enticed by his own desires. 15 Then desire, after it﻿* has conceived, gives birth to sin, and sin, when it﻿* is brought to completion, gives birth to death. 
16 Do not be deceived, my dear brothers. 17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow of change. 18 By his﻿* will he gave birth to us through the message of truth, so that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. 
Doers of the Message, Not Just Hearers
19 Understand this, my dear brothers: every person must be quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger, 20 for human anger does not accomplish the righteousness of God. 21 Therefore, putting aside all moral uncleanness and wicked excess, welcome with humility the implanted message which is able to save your souls. 
22 But be doers of the message and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves, 23 because if anyone is a hearer of the message and not a doer, this one is like someone staring at ⌊his own face⌋ in a mirror, 24 for he looks at himself and goes away and immediately forgets what sort of person he was. 25 But the one who looks into the perfect law of liberty and continues to do it, not being a forgetful hearer but a doer who acts, this one will be blessed ⌊in what he does⌋. 
26 If anyone thinks he is religious, although he﻿* does not bridle his tongue but deceives his heart, this person’s religion is worthless. 27 Pure and undefiled religion in the sight of our﻿* God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained by the world. 
Partiality Forbidden
2 My brothers, do not hold your faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ with partiality. 2 For if someone enters into your assembly in fine clothing with a gold ring on his finger, and a poor person in filthy clothing also enters, 3 and you look favorably on the one wearing the fine clothing and you say, “Be seated here in a good place,” and to the poor person you say, “You stand or be seated there by my footstool,” 4 have you not made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? 5 Listen, my dear brothers! Did not God choose the poor of the world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom that he has promised to those who love him? 6 But you have dishonored the poor! Are not the rich exploiting you and they themselves dragging you into the courts? 7 Do they themselves not blaspheme the good name ⌊of the one to whom you belong⌋? 
8 However, if you carry out the royal law according to the scripture, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing well. 9 But if you show partiality, you commit sin, and thus﻿* are convicted by the law as transgressors. 10 For whoever keeps the whole law but stumbles in one point only has become guilty of all of it. 11 For the one who said “Do not commit adultery” also said “Do not murder.” Now if you do not commit adultery but you do murder, you have become a transgressor of the law. 12 Thus speak and thus act as those who are going to be judged by the law of liberty. 13 For judgment is merciless to the one who has not practiced mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment. 
Faith and Works
14 What is the benefit, my brothers, if someone says that he has faith but does not have works? That faith is not able to save him, is it?* 15 If a brother or a sister is poorly clothed and lacking food for the day, 16 and one of you should say to them, “Go in peace, keep warm and ⌊eat well⌋,” but does not give them what is necessary for the body, what is the benefit? 17 Thus also faith, if it does not have works, is dead by itself. 
18 But someone will say, “You have faith and I have works.” Show me your faith apart from your﻿* works, and I will show you my﻿* faith by my works. 19 You believe that God is one; you do well. Even the demons believe, and shudder! 20 But do you want to know, O foolish person, that faith apart from works is useless? 21 Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he﻿* offered up his son Isaac on the altar? 22 You see that faith was working together with his works, and by the works the faith was perfected. 23 And the scripture was fulfilled that says, “And Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him for righteousness,” and he was called God’s friend. 24 You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone. 25 And likewise was not Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when she﻿* welcomed the messengers and sent them out by a different route? 26 For just as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead. 
Restraining the Tongue
3 Not many should become teachers, my brothers, because you﻿* know that we will receive a greater judgment. 2 For we all stumble in many ways. If anyone does not stumble in what he says, he is a perfect individual, able to hold in check his whole body also. 3 And if we put bits in the mouths of horses so that they obey us, we also guide their whole bodies. 4 Behold also ships: although they are so large and are driven by strong winds, they are guided by a very small rudder wherever the inclination of the pilot wishes. 5 So also the tongue is a small member of the body﻿* and boasts great things. Behold how small a fire sets ablaze how great a forest! 6 And the tongue is a fire! The world of unrighteousness, the tongue, is set among our members, defiling the whole body and setting on fire ⌊the course of human existence⌋, being set on fire by hell. 
7 For every species of animals and birds, of reptiles and sea creatures, is being tamed and has been tamed by the human species, 8 but no human being is able to tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison. 9 With it we bless the﻿* Lord and Father, and with it we curse people who are made in the likeness of God. 10 From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so! 11 A spring does not pour forth from the same opening fresh and bitter water, does it?* 12 A fig tree is not able, my brothers, to produce olives, or a grapevine figs. Neither can a saltwater spring produce fresh water. 
The Wisdom That Comes Down from Above
13 Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show by his﻿* good behavior his works, with the humility of wisdom. 14 But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast and tell lies against the truth. 15 This is not the wisdom that comes down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic. 16 For where there is jealousy and selfish ambition, there is disorder and every evil practice. 17 But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceful, gentle, obedient, full of mercy and good fruits, nonjudgmental, without hypocrisy, 18 And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace among those who make peace. 
Subject Yourselves to God
4 From where are conflicts and from where are quarrels among you? Is it not from this, from your pleasures that wage war among your members? 2 You desire and do not have; you murder and are filled with envy, and are not able to obtain; you fight and quarrel. You do not have because you do not ask. 3 You ask and do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, in order that you may spend it on your pleasures. 
4 Adulterous people! Do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Therefore whoever wants to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God. 5 Or do you think that in vain the scripture says, “The spirit which he caused to dwell in us desires jealously”? 6 But he gives greater grace. Therefore it says, 
“God opposes the proud, 
but gives grace to the humble.” 
7 Therefore subject yourselves to God. But resist the devil, and he will flee from you. 8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded! 9 Lament and mourn and weep! Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your﻿* joy to gloominess. 10 Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you. 
11 Do not speak evil of one another, brothers. The one who speaks evil of a brother or judges his brother speaks evil of the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law but a judge of the law. 12 There is one lawgiver and judge who is able to save and to destroy. But who are you to judge your﻿* neighbor? 
Arrogant Boasting About the Future
13 Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will travel to such and such a city and spend a year there, and carry on business and make a profit,” 14 you who do not know ⌊what will happen tomorrow⌋, ⌊what your life will be like⌋. For you are a smoky vapor that appears for a short time and then disappears. 15 Instead you should say, “If the Lord wills, we will live and do this or that.” 16 But now you boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil. 17 Therefore, to the one who knows to do good and does not do it, to him it is sin. 
Woes on the Rich Who Oppress Others
5 Come now, you rich people, weep and cry aloud over the miseries that are coming upon you! 2 Your wealth has rotted, and your clothing has become moth-eaten. 3 Your gold and silver have become corroded, and their corrosion will be a witness against you, and it will consume your flesh like fire. You have stored up treasure in the last days. 4 Behold, the wages that were held back by you from the workers who reap your fields cry out, and the cries of the reapers have come to the ears of the Lord of hosts. 5 You have lived self-indulgently on the earth and have lived luxuriously. You have fattened your hearts in the day of slaughter. 6 You have condemned, you have murdered the righteous person; he does not resist you. 
Exhortation to Patience
7 Therefore be patient, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the soil, being patient concerning it until it receives the early and late rains. 8 You also be patient. Strengthen your hearts, because the coming of the Lord is near. 9 Brothers, do not complain against one another, in order that you may not be judged. Behold, the judge stands before the doors! 10 Brothers, take as an example of perseverance and endurance the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. 11 Behold, we consider blessed those who have endured. You have heard about the patient endurance of Job, and you saw the outcome from the Lord, that the Lord is compassionate and merciful. 12 Now above all, my brothers, do not swear either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath, but let your yes be yes and your no, no, in order that you may not fall under judgment. 
The Effective Prayer of Faith
13 Is anyone among you suffering misfortune? He should pray. Is anyone cheerful? He should sing praise. 14 Is anyone among you sick? He should summon the elders of the church and they should pray over him, anointing him with olive oil in the name of the Lord. 15 And the prayer of faith will save the one who is sick, and the Lord will raise him up, and if he has committed sins ⌊he will be forgiven⌋. 16 Therefore confess your sins to one another, and pray for one another, so that you may be healed. The effective prayer of a righteous person accomplishes much. 17 Elijah was a human being with the same nature as us, and ⌊he prayed fervently⌋ for it not to rain, and it did not rain on the land for three years and six months. 18 And he prayed again, and the sky gave rain and the earth produced its fruit. 
19 My brothers, if anyone among you should wander away from the truth and someone turns him back, 20 he should know that the one who turns a sinner back from the error of his way will save that person’s soul from death, and will cover over a great number of sins.

THE FIRST LETTER OF PETER
 
Greeting
1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen who are residing temporarily in the dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 2 according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by the sanctification of the Spirit, for obedience and for sprinkling with the blood of Jesus Christ. May grace and peace be multiplied to you. 
A New Birth to a Living Hope
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4 into an inheritance imperishable and undefiled and unfading, reserved in heaven for you 5 who are being protected by the power of God through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time, 6 in which you rejoice greatly, although﻿* now for a short time, if necessary, you are distressed by various trials, 7 so that the genuineness of your faith, more valuable than gold that is passing away, but is tested by fire, may be found to result in praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 8 whom, although you﻿* have not seen, you love; in whom now you believe, although you﻿* do not see him, and you rejoice greatly with joy inexpressible and full of glory, 9 obtaining the goal of your faith, the salvation of your﻿* souls. 
10 Concerning this salvation, the prophets who prophesied about the grace meant for you sought and made careful inquiry, 11 investigating for what person or which time the Spirit of Christ in them was indicating when he﻿* testified beforehand to the sufferings with reference to Christ and the glories after these things, 12 to whom it was revealed that they were serving not themselves but you with reference to the same things which now have been announced to you through those who proclaimed the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, ⌊things into which⌋ angels desire to look. 
Be Holy in All Your Conduct
13 Therefore, ⌊when you have prepared your minds for action⌋ by﻿* being self-controlled, put your hope completely in the grace that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 14 As obedient children, do not be conformed to the former desires you used to conform to﻿* in your ignorance, 15 but as the one who called you is holy, you yourselves be holy in all your conduct, 16 for it is written, “You will be holy, because I am﻿* holy.”  17 And if you call on him as Father who judges impartially according to each one’s work, conduct yourselves with fear during the time of your temporary residence, 18 because you﻿* know that you were redeemed from your futile way of life inherited from your ancestors not with perishable things like silver or gold, 19 but with the precious blood of Christ, like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb 20 who was foreknown before the foundation of the world, but has been revealed in these last times for you 21 who through him are believing in God, who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope are in God. 
22 Having purified your souls by your obedience to the truth for sincere brotherly love, love one another fervently from the heart, 23 because you﻿* have been born again, not from perishable seed but imperishable, through the living and enduring word of God. 24 For 
“all flesh is like grass, 
and all its glory like the flower of the grass. 
The grass withers and the flower falls off, 
25 but the word of the Lord endures ⌊forever⌋.” 
And this is the word that has been proclaimed to you. 
Chosen as Living Stones
2 Therefore, ridding yourselves of all malice and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander, 2 like newborn infants long for the unadulterated spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow up to salvation, 3 if you have tasted that the Lord is kind, 4 to whom you are drawing near, a living stone rejected by men but chosen and precious in the sight of God. 5 And you yourselves, as living stones, are being built up as a spiritual house for a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 6 For it stands in scripture, 
“Behold, I am laying in Zion a stone, a chosen and precious cornerstone, 
and the one who believes in him will never be put to shame.” 
7 Therefore the honor is for you who believe, but for those who refuse to believe, 
“The stone that the builders rejected, 
this one has become ⌊the cornerstone⌋,” 
8 and 
“A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense,” 
who stumble because they﻿* disobey the word to which also they were consigned. 9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God’s possession, so that you may proclaim the virtues of the one who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light, 10 who once were not a people, but now are the people of God, the ones who were not shown mercy, but now are shown mercy. 
11 Dear friends, I urge you as foreigners and temporary residents to abstain from fleshly desires which wage war against your﻿* soul, 12 maintaining your good conduct among the Gentiles, so that in the things in which they slander you as evildoers, by seeing your good deeds they may glorify God on the day of visitation. 
Submission to Established Authority
13 Subject yourselves to every human authority for the sake of the Lord, whether to a king as having supreme authority, 14 or to governors as those sent out by him for the punishment of those who do evil and the praise of those who do good. 15 For the will of God is as follows: by﻿* doing good to silence the ignorance of foolish people. 16 Live as free persons, and not using your﻿* freedom as a covering for evil, but as slaves of God. 17 Honor all people, love the community of believers, fear God, honor the king. 
18 Domestic slaves, be subject to your﻿* masters with all respect, not only to those who are good and gentle, but also to those who are unjust. 19 For this finds favor, if because of consciousness of God someone endures sorrows while﻿* suffering unjustly. 20 For what credit is it if, when you﻿* sin and are beaten for it, you endure? But if you endure when you﻿* do good and suffer for it, this finds favor with God. 21 For to this you were called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, so that you should follow in his footsteps, 22 who did not commit sin, nor was deceit found in his mouth, 23 who when he﻿* was reviled, did not revile in return; when﻿* suffering, he did not threaten, but entrusted himself to the one who judges justly, 24 who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, so that we may die to sins and live to righteousness, by whose wounds you were healed. 25 For you were going astray like sheep, but you have turned back now to the shepherd and guardian of your souls. 
Wives and Husbands
3 In the same way, wives, be subject to your own husbands, so that even if some are disobedient to the word, they may be won over without a word by the conduct of their wives, 2 when they﻿* see your respectful, pure conduct. 3 Let your adornment not be the external kind, braiding hair and putting on gold jewelry or putting on fine clothing, 4 but the hidden person of the heart, with the imperishable quality of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is highly valuable in the sight of God. 5 For in the same way formerly the holy women also, who hoped in God, used to adorn themselves by﻿* being subject to their own husbands, 6 like Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children you have become when you﻿* do good and are not frightened with respect to any terror. 
7 Husbands, in the same way live with your wives ⌊knowledgeably⌋, as with the weaker female vessel, showing them honor as fellow heirs also of the grace of life, so that your prayers will not be hindered. 
Called to Inherit a Blessing
8 And finally, all of you be harmonious, sympathetic, showing mutual affection, compassionate, humble, 9 not repaying evil for evil or insult for insult, but on the other hand blessing others, because for this reason you were called, so that you could inherit a blessing. 10 For 
“The one who wants to love life 
and see good days 
must keep his﻿* tongue from evil 
and his lips must not speak deceit. 
11 And he must turn away from evil and do good; 
he must seek peace and pursue it. 
12 For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, 
and his ears are open to their prayer. 
But the face of the Lord is against those who do evil. 
Suffer for Doing What is Good
13 And who is the one who will harm you if you are a zealous adherent for what is good? 14 But even if you might suffer for the sake of righteousness, you are blessed. And do not be afraid of their intimidation or be disturbed, 15 but set Christ apart as Lord in your hearts, always ready to make a defense to anyone who asks you for an accounting concerning the hope that is in you. 16 But do so with courtesy and respect, having a good conscience, so that in the things in which you are slandered, the ones who malign your good conduct in Christ may be put to shame. 17 For it is better to suffer for doing good, ⌊if God wills it⌋, than for doing evil. 
18 For Christ also suffered once for sins, 
the just for the unjust, 
in order that he could bring you to God, 
being put to death in the flesh, 
but made alive in the spirit, 
19 in which also he went and proclaimed to the spirits in prison, 
20 who were formerly disobedient, when the patience of God waited in the days of Noah, while﻿* an ark was being constructed, in which a few—that is, eight souls—were rescued through water. 21 And also, corresponding to this, baptism now saves you, not the removal of dirt from the flesh, but an appeal to God for a good conscience through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 22 who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, with angels and authorities and powers having been subjected to him. 
The Time for Behaving Like the Gentiles is Past
4 Therefore, because﻿* Christ suffered in the flesh, you also equip yourselves with the same way of thinking, because the one who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, 2 in order to live the remaining time in the flesh no longer for human desires, but for the will of God. 3 For the time that has passed was sufficient ⌊to do what the Gentiles desire to do⌋, having lived in licentiousness, evil desires, drunkenness, carousing, drinking parties, and wanton idolatries, 4 with respect to which they are surprised when﻿* you do not run with them into the same flood of dissipation, and so they﻿* revile you. 5 They will give an account to the one who is ready to judge the living and the dead. 6 Because for this reason also the gospel was preached to those who are dead, so that they were judged ⌊by human standards⌋ in the flesh, but they may live in the spirit ⌊by God’s standards⌋. 
Serving to the Glory of God
7 Now the end of all things draws near. Therefore be self-controlled and sober-minded for your prayers. 8 Above all, keep your love for one another constant, because love covers a large number of sins. 9 Be hospitable to one another without complaining. 10 Just as each one has received a gift, use it for serving one another, as good stewards of the varied grace of God. 11 If anyone speaks, let it be as the oracles of God; if anyone serves, let it be as by the strength that God provides, so that in all things God will be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the power ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen. 
Sharing the Sufferings of Christ
12 Dear friends, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal among you, when it﻿* takes place to test you, as if something strange were happening to you. 13 But to the degree that you share in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, so that also at the revelation of his glory you may rejoice and be glad. 14 If you are reviled on account of the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you. 15 By all means do not let anyone of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or an evildoer or as a meddler. 16 But if someone suffers as a Christian, he must not be ashamed, but must glorify God with this name. 17 For it is the time for the judgment to begin out from the household of God. But if it begins out from us first, what will be the outcome for those who are disobedient to the gospel of God? 18 And if the righteous are saved with difficulty, ⌊what will become of the ungodly and the sinner⌋? 19 So then also those who suffer according to the will of God must entrust their souls to a faithful Creator in doing good. 
Leadership and Humility
5 Therefore I, your fellow elder and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and﻿* also a sharer of the glory that is going to be revealed, exhort the elders among you: 2 shepherd the flock of God among you, exercising oversight not by compulsion but willingly, in accordance with God, and not greedily but eagerly, 3 and not as lording it over ⌊those under your care⌋, but being examples for the flock. 4 And when﻿* the chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the unfading crown of glory. 
5 In the same way, younger men, be subject to the elders, and all of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble. 6 Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you at the right time, 7 casting all your cares on him, because ⌊he cares⌋ for you. 
8 Be sober; be on the alert. Your adversary the devil walks around like a roaring lion, looking for someone to devour. 9 ⌊Resist him⌋, steadfast in your faith, because you﻿* know the same kinds of sufferings are being accomplished by your community of believers in the world. 10 And the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you﻿* have suffered for a short time, will himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you. 11 To him be the power ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen. 
Conclusion and Final Greetings
12 Through Silvanus, the faithful brother (as I consider him), I have written to you ⌊briefly⌋ to encourage you and to attest that this is the true grace of God. Stand firm in it. 13 She who is in Babylon, chosen the same as you, greets you, and so does my son Mark. 14 Greet one another with a loving kiss. Peace to all of you who are in Christ.

THE SECOND LETTER OF PETER
 
Greeting
1 Simeon Peter, a slave and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a faith equal in value to ours by the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 May grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord, 3 because his divine power has bestowed on us all things that are necessary for life and godliness, through the knowledge of the one who called us by his own glory and excellence of character, 4 through which things he has bestowed on us his precious and very great promises, so that through these you may become sharers of the divine nature after﻿* escaping from the corruption that is in the world because of evil desire, 5 and for this same reason, and by﻿* applying all diligence, supply with your faith excellence of character, and with excellence of character, knowledge, 6 and with knowledge, self-control, and with self-control, patient endurance, and with patient endurance, godliness, 7 and with godliness, brotherly love, and with brotherly love, love. 
Make Your Calling and Election Secure
8 For if﻿* these things are yours and are increasing, this does not make you useless or unproductive in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 9 For the one for whom these things are not present is blind, being nearsighted, ⌊having forgotten the cleansing⌋ of his former sins. 10 Therefore, brothers, be zealous even more to make your calling and election secure, because if you﻿* do these things, you will never ever stumble. 11 For in this way entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will be richly supplied for you. 
12 Therefore I intend to remind you continually concerning these things, although you know them and are established in the truth that you have. 13 But I consider it right, for as long as I am in this habitation, to stir you up by a reminder, 14 because I﻿* know that the removal of my habitation is imminent, as indeed our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me. 15 And I will also make every effort that you are able at any time, after my departure, ⌊to recall these things to mind⌋. 
The Reliable Prophetic Word of Testimony
16 For we did not make known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ by﻿* following ingeniously concocted myths, but by﻿* being eyewitnesses of that one’s majesty. 17 For he received honor and glory from God the Father when﻿* a voice such as this was brought to him by the Majestic Glory, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” 18 And we ourselves heard this voice brought from heaven when we﻿* were with him on the holy mountain, 19 and we possess as more reliable the prophetic word, to which you do well if you﻿* pay attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts, 20 recognizing this above all, that every prophecy of scripture does not come about from one’s own interpretation, 21 for no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men carried along by the Holy Spirit spoke from God. 
The Rise and Fall of the False Teachers
2 But there were also false prophets among the people, as there will be false teachers among you also, who will bring in ⌊destructive heresies⌋, even denying the Master who bought them, thus﻿* bringing on themselves swift destruction. 2 And many will follow their licentious ways, because of whom the way of truth will be reviled. 3 And in greediness they will exploit you with false words, whose condemnation from long ago is not idle, and their destruction is not asleep. 
4 For if God did not spare the angels who sinned, but held them captive in Tartarus with chains of darkness and handed them over to be kept for judgment, 5 and did not spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah, a proclaimer of righteousness, ⌊and seven others⌋ when he﻿* brought a flood on the world of the ungodly, 6 and condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction, reducing them to ashes, having appointed them as an example for those who are going to be ungodly, 7 and rescued righteous Lot, worn down by the way of life of lawless persons in licentiousness 8 (for that righteous man, as he﻿* lived among them day after day, was tormenting his righteous soul by the lawless deeds he was seeing and hearing), 9 then the Lord knows how to rescue the godly from trials and to reserve the unrighteous to be punished at the day of judgment, 10 and especially those who go after the flesh in defiling lust and who despise authority. 
Bold and arrogant, they do not tremble in awe as they﻿* blaspheme majestic beings, 11 whereas angels, who are greater in strength and power, do not bring against them a demeaning judgment. 12 But these persons, like irrational animals born only with natural instincts for capture and killing, blaspheming ⌊about things⌋ they do not understand, in their destruction will also be destroyed, 13 being harmed as the wages of unrighteousness. Considering reveling in the daytime a pleasure, they are stains and blemishes, carousing in their deceitful pleasures when they﻿* feast together with you, 14 having eyes full of desire for an adulteress and unceasing from sin, enticing unstable persons, and﻿* having hearts trained for greediness. Accursed children! 15 By﻿* leaving the straight path, they have gone astray, because they﻿* followed the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 16 but received a rebuke for his own lawlessness: a speechless donkey, speaking with a human voice, restrained ⌊the prophet’s madness⌋. 
17 These people are waterless springs and mists driven by a hurricane, for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved. 18 ⌊For by speaking high-sounding but empty words⌋, they entice with desires of the flesh and with licentiousness those who are scarcely escaping from those who live in error, 19 promising them freedom although they﻿* themselves are slaves of depravity. For to whatever someone succumbs, by this he is also enslaved. 20 For if, after they﻿* have escaped from the defilements of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and they are again entangled in these things and succumb to them, the last state has become worse for them than the first. 21 For it would have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness than having known it, to turn back from the holy commandment that had been delivered to them. 22 The statement of the true proverb has happened to them, “A dog returns to its own vomit,” and “A sow, after﻿* washing herself, returns﻿* to wallowing in the mud.” 
The Coming Day of the Lord
3 Dear friends, this is already the second letter I am writing to you, in both of which I am attempting to stir up your sincere mind by a reminder, 2 to remember the words proclaimed beforehand by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles, 3 above all knowing this, that in the last days scoffers will come with scoffing, following according to their own desires 4 and saying, “Where is the promise of his coming? For ⌊ever since⌋ the fathers fell asleep, all things have continued just as they have been from the beginning of creation.” 5 For when﻿* they maintain this, it escapes their notice that the heavens existed long ago and the earth held together out of water and through water by the word of God, 6 by means of which things the world that existed at that time was destroyed by﻿* being inundated with water. 7 But by the same word the present heavens and earth are reserved for fire, being kept for the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly people. 
8 Now, dear friends, do not let this one thing escape your notice, that one day with the Lord is like a thousand years, and a thousand years is like one day. 9 The Lord is not delaying the promise, as some consider slowness, but is being patient toward you, because he﻿* does not want any to perish, but all to come to repentance. 10 But the day of the Lord will come like a thief, in which the heavens will disappear with a rushing noise, and the celestial bodies will be destroyed by﻿* being burned up, and the earth and the deeds done on it will be disclosed. 11 Because﻿* all these things are being destroyed in this way, what sort of people must you be in holy behavior and godliness, 12 while﻿* waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God, because of which the heavens will be destroyed by﻿* being burned up and the celestial bodies will melt as they﻿* are consumed by heat! 13 But according to his promise, we are waiting for new heavens and a new earth in which righteousness resides. 
Final Exhortations and Conclusion
14 Therefore, dear friends, because you﻿* are waiting for these things, make every effort to be found at peace, spotless and unblemished in him. 15 And regard the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as also our dear brother Paul wrote to you, according to the wisdom that was given to him, 16 as he does also in all his﻿*﻿ letters, speaking in them about these things, in which there are some things hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable distort to their own destruction, as they also do the rest of the scriptures. 17 Therefore, dear friends, because you﻿* know this beforehand, guard yourselves so that you do not lose your own safe position because you﻿* have been led away by the error of lawless persons. 18 But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory, both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.

THE FIRST LETTER OF JOHN
 
Prologue
1 What was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have looked at and our hands have touched, concerning the word of life—2 and the life was revealed, and we have seen and testify and announce to you the eternal life which was with the Father and was revealed to us—3 what we have seen and heard, we announce to you also, in order that you also may have fellowship with us, and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. 4 And these things we write, in order that our joy may be complete. 
God is Light, so Walk in the Light
5 And this is the message which we have heard from him and announce to you, that God is light and there is no darkness in him at all. 6 If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth. 7 But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin. 8 If we say that we do not have sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us. 9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, so that he will forgive us our﻿* sins and will cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. 
Keeping the New Commandment
2 My little children, I am writing these things to you in order that you may not sin. And if anyone sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous one, 2 and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 3 And by this we know that we have come to know him, if we keep his commandments. 4 The one who says “I have come to know him,” and does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in this person. 5 But whoever keeps his word, truly in this person the love of God has been perfected. By this we know that we are in him. 6 The one who says that he resides in him ought also to walk just as that one walked. 
7 Dear friends, I am not writing a new commandment to you, but an old commandment which you have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the message which you have heard. 8 Again, I am writing a new commandment to you, which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light already is shining. 9 The one who says he is in the light and hates his brother is in the darkness until now. 10 The one who loves his brother resides in the light, and there is no cause for stumbling in him. 11 But the one who hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes. 
Encouragement and Assurance
12 I am writing to you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven you on account of his name. 13 I am writing to you, fathers, because you have known the One who is from the beginning. I am writing to you, young men, because you have conquered the evil one. 14 I have written to you, children, because you have known the Father. I have written to you, fathers, because you have known the One who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God resides in you, and you have conquered the evil one. 
Do Not Love the World
15 Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 16 because everything that is in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the arrogance of material possessions—is not from the Father, but is from the world. 17 And the world is passing away, and its desire, but the one who does the will of God remains ⌊forever⌋. 
Departure of the False Teachers
18 Children, it is the last hour, and just as you have heard that antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have arisen, by which we know that it is the last hour. 19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us. But they went out﻿*, in order that it might be shown that all of them are not of us. 
20 And you have an anointing from the Holy One, and you all know. 21 I have not written to you because you do not know the truth, but because you do know it, and because every lie is not of the truth. 22 Who is the liar except the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This person is the antichrist, the one who denies the Father and the Son. 23 Everyone who denies the Son does not have the Father either; the one who confesses the Son has the Father also. 
24 As for you, what you have heard from the beginning must remain in you. If what you have heard from the beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son and in the Father. 25 And this is the promise which he himself promised us: eternal life. 26 These things I have written to you concerning the ones who are trying to deceive you. 
27 And as for you, the anointing which you received from him remains in you, and you do not have need that anyone teach you. But as his anointing teaches you about all things, and is true and is not a lie, and just as it has taught you, you reside﻿* in him. 
God’s Children
28 And now, little children, remain in him, so that whenever he is revealed we may have confidence and not be put to shame before him at his coming. 29 If you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who practices righteousness has been fathered by him. 
3 See what sort of love the Father has given to us: that we should be called children of God, and we are! Because of this the world does not know us: because it did not know him. 2 Dear friends, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. We know that whenever he is revealed we will be like him, because we will see him just as he is. 3 And everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as that one is pure. 
4 Everyone who practices sin also practices lawlessness, and sin is lawlessness. 5 And you know that that one was revealed in order that he might take away sins, and in him there is no sin. 6 Everyone who resides in him does not sin. Everyone who sins has neither seen him nor known him. 7 Little children, let no one deceive you: the one who practices righteousness is righteous, just as that one is righteous. 8 The one who practices sin is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. For this reason the Son of God was revealed: in order to destroy the works of the devil. 9 Everyone who is fathered by God does not practice sin, because his seed resides in him, and he is not able to sin, because he has been fathered by God. 10 By this the children of God and the children of the devil are evident: everyone who does not practice righteousness is not of God, namely, the one who does not love his brother. 
God is Love, so Love One Another
11 For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning: that we should love one another, 12 not as Cain, who was of the evil one and violently murdered his brother. And ⌊for what reason⌋ did he violently murder him? Because his deeds were evil and the deeds of his brother were righteous. 
13 Do not marvel, brothers, if the world hates you. 14 We know that we have passed over from death to life because we love the brothers. The one who does not love remains in death. 15 Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that every murderer does not have eternal life residing in him. 16 We have come to know love by this: that ⌊he⌋ laid down his life on behalf of us, and we ought to lay down our lives on behalf of the brothers. 17 But whoever has the world’s material possessions and observes his brother ⌊in need⌋ and shuts his heart against him, how does the love of God reside in him? 
18 Little children, let us not love with word or with tongue, but in deed and truth. 19 By this we know that we are of the truth and will convince our heart before him, 20 that if our heart condemns us, that God is greater than our heart and knows all things. 21 Dear friends, if our heart does not condemn us, we have confidence before God, 22 and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what is pleasing ⌊in his sight⌋. 23 And this is his commandment: that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as ⌊he commanded us⌋. 24 And the one who keeps his commandments resides in him, and he in him. And by this we know that he resides in us: by the Spirit whom he has given to us. 
How to Recognize the Spirit of God
4 Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to determine if they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world. 2 By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God, 3 and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God, and this is the spirit of the antichrist, of which you have heard that it is coming, and now it is already in the world. 
4 You are from God, little children, and have conquered them, because the one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world. 5 They are from the world; ⌊therefore⌋ they speak from the world and the world listens to them. 6 We are from God. The one who knows God listens to us; whoever is not from God does not listen to us. By this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of deceit. 
God’s Love Revealed
7 Dear friends, let us love one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been fathered by God and knows God. 8 The one who does not love does not know God, because God is love. 9 By this the love of God is revealed in us: that God sent his one and only Son into the world in order that we may live through him. 10 In this is love: not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 
11 Dear friends, if God loved us in this way, we also ought to love one another. 12 No one has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God resides in us and his love is perfected in us. 13 By this we know that we reside in him and he in us: that he has given us of his Spirit. 14 And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. 
15 Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God resides in him and he in God. 16 And we have come to know and have believed the love that God has in us. God is love, and the one who resides in love resides in God, and God resides in him. 17 By this love is perfected with us, so that we may have confidence in the day of judgment, because just as that one is, so also are we in this world. 18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love drives out fear, because fear includes punishment, and the one who is afraid has not been perfected in love. 19 We love, because he first loved us. 
20 If anyone says, “I love God,” and hates his brother, he is a liar, for the one who does not love his brother whom he has seen is not able to love God whom he has not seen. 21 And this is the commandment we have from him: that the one who loves God should love his brother also. 
5 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been fathered by God, and everyone who loves ⌊the father⌋ also loves the child fathered by him. 2 By this we know that we love the children of God: whenever we love God and keep his commandments. 3 For this is the love of God: that we keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome, 4 because everyone who is fathered by God conquers the world. 
God Has Given Us Eternal Life in the Son
And this is the victory which has conquered the world: our faith. 5 Now who is the one who conquers the world except the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 6 This is the one who came by water and blood—Jesus Christ, not with the water only, but with the water and with the blood. And the Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth. 7 For there are three that testify, 8 the Spirit and the water and the blood, and the three are ⌊in agreement⌋. 
9 If we receive the testimony of people, the testimony of God is greater, because this is the testimony of God that he has testified concerning his Son. 10 (The one who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. The one who does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has testified concerning his Son.) 11 And this is the testimony: that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. 12 The one who has the Son has the life; the one who does not have the Son of God does not have the life. 
Our Assurance of Eternal Life
13 These things I have written to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, in order that you may know that you have eternal life. 
14 And this is the confidence that we have before him: that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us. 15 And if we know that he hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we have the requests that we have asked from him. 16 If anyone should see his brother sinning a sin not leading to death, he should ask, and he will grant life to him, to those who sin not leading to death. (There is a sin leading to death; I do not say that he should ask about that. 17 All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not leading to death.) 
18 We know that everyone who is fathered by God does not sin, but the one fathered by God, he protects him, and the evil one does not touch him. 19 We know that we are from God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one. 20 And we know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, in order that we may know the one who is true, and we are in the one who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This one is the true God and eternal life. 21 Little children, guard yourselves from idols.

THE SECOND LETTER OF JOHN
 
Greeting
1 The elder, to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in truth—and not I alone, but also all those who know the truth—2 because of the truth that resides in us and will be with us ⌊forever⌋. 3 Grace, mercy, peace will be with us from God the Father and from Jesus Christ the Son of the Father in truth and love. 
4 ⌊I was very glad⌋ because I found some of your children walking in the truth, just as ⌊the Father commanded us⌋. 
Watch Out for False Teachers
5 And now I ask you, lady (not as if I were writing a new commandment to you, but one that we have had from the beginning), that we should love one another. 6 And this is love: that we walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as you have heard from the beginning, so that you should walk in it. 7 For many deceivers have gone out into the world, those who do not confess Jesus Christ coming in the flesh. This person is the deceiver and the antichrist! 8 Watch yourselves that you do not lose what we have worked for, but receive a full reward. 
9 Everyone who goes too far and does not remain in the teaching of Christ does not have God. The one who remains in the teaching—this person has both the Father and the Son. 10 If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into your house and do not speak a greeting to him, 11 because the one who speaks a greeting to him shares in his evil deeds. 
Conclusion and Final Greeting
12 Although﻿* I have many things to write to you, I do not want to do so by means of paper and ink, but I hope to be with you and to speak ⌊face to face⌋, so that your joy may be complete. 13 The children of your elect sister greet you.

THE THIRD LETTER OF JOHN
 
Greeting
1 The elder, to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in the truth. 2 Dear friend, I pray you may prosper concerning everything and be healthy, just as your soul prospers. 3 For I rejoiced exceedingly when the﻿* brothers came and testified to your truth, just as you are walking in the truth. 4 I have no greater joy than this: that I hear my children are walking in the truth. 
Instructions to Gaius
5 Dear friend, you act faithfully in whatever you do for the brothers, ⌊even though they are strangers⌋. 6 They have testified to your love before the church; you will do well to send them on their way in a manner worthy of God. 7 For they have gone out on behalf of the name, accepting nothing from the pagans. 8 Therefore we ought to support such people, so that we become fellow workers with the truth. 
Diotrephes Causes Trouble
9 I wrote something to the church, but Diotrephes, who wants to be first among them, does not acknowledge us. 10 Therefore, if I come, I will call attention to ⌊the deeds he is doing⌋, disparaging us with evil words. And not being content with these, he does not receive the brothers himself, and he hinders those wanting to do so and throws them out of the church. 11 Dear friend, do not imitate what is evil, but what is good. The one who does good is of God; the one who does evil has not seen God. 
Demetrius Commended
12 Demetrius has been testified to by all, even by the truth itself. And we also testify to him, and you know that our testimony is true. 
Conclusion and Final Greeting
13 I have many things to write to you, but I do not want to write to you by means of ink and pen. 14 But I hope to see you right away, and to speak ⌊face to face⌋. 15 Peace be to you. The friends greet you. Greet the friends by name.

THE LETTER OF JUDE
 
Greeting
1 Jude, a slave of Jesus Christ and brother of James, to those who are called, loved in God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ. 2 May mercy and peace and love be multiplied to you. 
Contend for the Faith
3 Dear friends, although I﻿* was making every effort to write to you concerning our common salvation, I considered it a necessity to write to you to encourage you to contend for the faith delivered once and for all to the saints. 4 For certain men have slipped in stealthily, who were designated long ago for this condemnation, ungodly ones, who change the grace of our God into licentiousness and who deny our only Master and Lord Jesus Christ. 
Condemnation of the Ungodly False Teachers
5 Now I want to remind you, although you know everything once and for all, that Jesus, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, the second time destroyed those who did not believe. 6 And the angels who did not keep to their own domain but deserted their proper dwelling place, he has kept in eternal bonds under deep gloom for the judgment of the great day, 7 as Sodom and Gomorrah and the towns around them indulged in sexual immorality and ⌊pursued unnatural desire⌋ in the same way as these, are exhibited as an example by﻿* undergoing the punishment of eternal fire. 
8 Despite that, in the same way also these men, because of their﻿* dreams, defile the flesh and reject authority and blaspheme majestic beings. 9 But Michael the archangel, when he argued with the devil, disputing concerning the body of Moses, did not dare to pronounce a blasphemous judgment, but said, “The Lord rebuke you!” 10 But these persons blaspheme all that they do not understand, and all that they understand by instinct like the irrational animals, by these things they are being destroyed. 11 Woe to them! For they have traveled in the way of Cain, and have given themselves up to the error of Balaam for gain, and have perished in the rebellion of Korah. 12 These are the ones feasting together without reverence, hidden reefs at your love feasts, caring for themselves, waterless clouds carried away by winds, late autumn trees without fruit, twice dead, uprooted, 13 wild waves of the sea foaming up their own shameful deeds, wandering stars, for whom the deep gloom of darkness has been reserved for eternity. 
14 And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, also prophesied about these people, saying, “Behold, the Lord came with tens of thousands of his holy ones 15 to execute judgment against all, and to convict all the ungodly concerning all their ungodly deeds that they have committed in an ungodly way, and concerning all the harsh things that ungodly sinners have spoken against him. 16 These people are grumblers, discontented, proceeding according to their desires, and their mouths speaking pompous words, ⌊showing partiality to gain an advantage⌋. 
Persevere in the Love of God
17 But you, dear friends, remember the words proclaimed beforehand by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, 18 for they said to you, “In the end time there will be scoffers following according to their own ungodly desires.” 19 These are the ones who cause divisions, worldly, not having the Spirit. 20 But you, dear friends, by﻿* building yourselves up in your most holy faith, by﻿* praying in the Holy Spirit, 21 keep yourselves in the love of God, looking forward to the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life. 22 And have mercy on those who doubt, 23 and save others by﻿* snatching them from the fire, and have mercy on others with fear, hating even the tunic stained by the flesh. 
Benediction
24 Now to the one who is able to protect you from stumbling and make you to stand before his glory blameless with exultation, 25 to the only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, power, and authority before all time and now and for all eternity. Amen.

THE REVELATION TO JOHN
 
Prologue
1 The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show to his slaves the things which must take place in a short time, and communicated it by﻿* sending it through his angel to his slave John, 2 who testified about the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all that he saw. 3 Blessed is the one who reads aloud and blessed are﻿* those who hear the words of the prophecy and observe the things written in it, because the time is near! 
Greetings to the Churches
4 John, to the seven churches in Asia: grace to you and peace from the one who is and the one who was and the one who is coming, and from the seven spirits who are before his throne, 5 and from Jesus Christ the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead and the ruler of the kings of the earth. 
To the one who loves us and released us from our sins by his blood 6 and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father—to him be the glory and the power ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen. 
7 Behold, he is coming with the clouds, 
and every eye will see him, 
even every one who pierced him, 
and all the tribes of the earth will mourn over him. 
Yes, amen. 
8 I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord God, the one who is and the one who was and the one who is coming, the All-Powerful. 
John’s Vision of the Son of Man
9 I, John, your brother and co-sharer in the affliction and kingdom and steadfastness in Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of the word of God and the testimony about Jesus. 10 I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a great sound like a trumpet 11 saying, “What you see, write in a book and send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamum and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea.” 
12 And I turned to see the voice which was speaking with me, and when I﻿* turned, I saw seven gold lampstands, 13 and in the midst of the lampstands one like a son of man, dressed in a robe reaching to the feet and girded around his﻿* chest with a golden belt, 14 and his head and hair were white like wool, white as snow, and his eyes were like a fiery flame, 15 and his feet were like fine bronze when it has been fired in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of many waters, 16 and he had in his right hand seven stars, and a sharp double-edged sword coming out of his mouth, and his face was like the sun shining in its strength. 
17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feet like a dead person, and he placed his right hand on me, saying, “Do not be afraid! I am the first and the last, 18 and the one who lives, and I was dead, and behold, I am living ⌊forever and ever⌋, and I hold the keys of death and of Hades. 19 Therefore, write the things which you saw, and the things which are, and the things which are about to take place after these things. 20 As for the mystery of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand and the seven gold lampstands—the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches. 
The Letter to the Church in Ephesus
2 “To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: 
“This is what the one who holds the seven stars in his right hand says, the one who walks in the midst of the seven gold lampstands: 2 ‘I know your works, and your labor and patient endurance, and that you are not able to tolerate evil, and you put to the test those who call themselves apostles and are not, and you found them to be false. 3 And you have patient endurance, and have endured many things because of my name, and have not become weary. 4 But I have this against you: that you have left your first love. 5 Remember therefore from where you have fallen, and repent and do ⌊the works you did at first⌋. But if you do not, I am coming to you, and I will remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent. 6 But you do have this: that you hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, things which I also hate. 7 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who conquers, I will grant to him to eat from the tree of life which is in the paradise of God.’ 
The Letter to the Church in Smyrna
8 “And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: 
“This is what the first and the last says, who was dead and came to life: 9 ‘I know your affliction and poverty (but you are rich), and the slander of those ⌊who call themselves Jews⌋ and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan. 10 Do not be afraid of the things which you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison so that you may be tested, and you will experience affliction ten days. Be faithful until death, and I will give you the crown of life. 11 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one who conquers will never be harmed by the second death.’ 
The Letter to the Church in Pergamum
12 “And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write: 
“This is what the one who has the sharp double-edged sword says: 13 ‘I know where you live, where the throne of Satan is. And you hold fast to my name and did not deny your﻿* faith in me, even in the days of Antipas my faithful witness, who was killed among you, where Satan lives. 14 But I have a few things against you: that you have there those who hold fast to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, to eat food sacrificed to idols and to commit sexual immorality. 15 So likewise you also have those who hold fast to the teaching of the Nicolaitans. 16 Therefore repent! But if you do not, I am coming to you quickly, and I will make war with them with the sword from my mouth. 17 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who conquers, I will give to him some of the hidden manna, and I will give to him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written, that no one knows except the one who receives it.’ 
The Letter to the Church in Thyatira
18 “And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: 
“This is what the Son of God says, the one who has his eyes like a fiery flame and his feet like fine bronze: 19 ‘I know your works, and your love, and faith, and service, and patient endurance—and your last works are greater than the first. 20 But I have against you that you tolerate the woman Jezebel, the one who calls herself a prophetess, and teaches and deceives my slaves to commit sexual immorality and to eat food sacrificed to idols. 21 And I have given her time in order to repent, and she did not want to repent from her sexual immorality. 22 Behold, I am throwing her into a sickbed and those who committed adultery with her into great affliction, unless they repent from her deeds. 23 And I will kill her children with deadly disease, and all the churches will know that I am the one who searches minds and hearts, and I will give to each one of you according to your deeds. 24 But I say to you, to the rest who are in Thyatira, all those who do not hold this teaching, who have not known the deep things of Satan, as they say, I do not put upon you any other burden. 25 Nevertheless, hold fast to what you have until I come. 26 And the one who conquers and who keeps my works until the end, I will give him authority over the nations, 27 and “he will shepherd them with an iron rod; he will break them in pieces like jars made of clay,” 28 as I also have received from my Father, and I will give him the morning star. 29 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’ 
The Letter to the Church in Sardis
3 “And to the angel of the church in Sardis write: 
“This is what the one who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars says: ‘I know your works, that you have a name that you are alive, and you are dead. 2 Be on the alert and strengthen the remaining things that are about to die, for I have not found your works completed before my God. 3 Therefore remember how you have received and heard, and observe it, and repent. If therefore you are not on the alert, I will come like a thief, and you will never know at what hour I will come against you. 4 But you have a few ⌊people⌋ in Sardis who have not defiled their clothing, and they will walk with me in white, because they are worthy. 5 The one who conquers in this way will be dressed in white clothing, and I will never erase his name from the book of life, and I will declare his name before my Father and before his angels. 6 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’ 
The Letter to the Church in Philadelphia
7 “And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: 
“This is what the holy one, the true one, the one who has the key of David, the one who opens and no one can shut, and who shuts and no one can open, says: 8 ‘I know your works (behold, I have put before you an opened door that no one is able to shut﻿*) that you have a little strength, and have kept my word, and did not deny my name. 9 Behold, I am causing those of the synagogue of Satan, the ones who call themselves Jews and are not, but are lying—behold, I will make them ⌊come⌋ and kneel down before your feet and acknowledge that I have loved you. 10 Because you have kept the word of my patient endurance, I also will keep you from the hour of testing that is about to come upon the whole inhabited world, to put to the test those who live on the earth. 11 I am coming quickly! Hold fast to what you have, so that no one may take away your crown. 12 The one who conquers, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will never go outside again, and I will write on him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven from my God, and my new name. 13 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’ 
The Letter to the Church in Laodicea
14 “And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: 
“This is what the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the originator of God’s creation, says: 15 ‘I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot. Would that you were cold or hot! 16 Thus, because you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, I am about to vomit you out of my mouth! 17 Because you are saying, “I am rich, and have become rich, and I have need of nothing,” and you do not know that you are wretched and pitiable and poor and blind and naked, 18 I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire, in order that you may become rich, and white clothing, in order that you may be clothed and the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed, and eye salve to smear on your eyes, in order that you may see. 19 As many as I love, I reprove and discipline. Be zealous, therefore, and repent! 20 Behold, I stand at the door and knock! If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, indeed I will come in to him and dine with him, and he with me. 21 The one who conquers, I will grant to him to sit down with me on my throne, as I also have conquered and have sat down with my Father on his throne. 22 The one who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’ ” 
The Heavenly Throne
4 After these things I looked, and behold, an open door in heaven, and the former voice that I had heard like a trumpet speaking with me was saying, “Come up here and I will show you the things which must take place after these things.” 2 Immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one was seated on the throne. 3 And the one seated was similar in appearance to jasper and carnelian stone, and a rainbow was around the throne similar in appearance to emerald. 4 And around the throne were twenty-four thrones, and seated on the thrones were twenty-four elders dressed in white clothing, and on their heads were gold crowns. 5 And from the throne came out lightnings and sounds and thunders, and seven torches of fire were burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. 6 And before the throne was something like a sea of glass, like crystal, and in the midst of the throne and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes in front and in back. 7 And the first living creature was similar to a lion, and the second living creature was similar to an ox, and the third living creature had a face like a man’s, and the fourth living creature was similar to an eagle flying. 8 And the four living creatures, ⌊each one⌋ of them, had six wings apiece, full of eyes around and inside, and they do not have rest day and night, saying, 
“Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God All-Powerful, 
the one who was and the one who is and the one who is coming!” 
9 And whenever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanks to the one who is seated on the throne, the one who lives ⌊forever and ever⌋, 10 the twenty-four elders fall down before the one who is seated on the throne and worship the one who lives ⌊forever and ever⌋, and put down their crowns before the throne, saying, 
11 “You are worthy, our Lord and God, 
to receive glory and honor and power, 
because you have created all things, 
and because of your will they existed and were created.” 
The Scroll with Seven Seals and the Lamb
5 And I saw in the right hand of the one who is seated on the throne a scroll, written inside and on the back, sealed up with seven seals. 2 And I saw a powerful angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and to break its seals?” 3 And no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it. 4 And I began to weep loudly because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it. 5 And one of the elders said to me, “Do not weep! Behold, the lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals. 
6 And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures and in the midst of the elders a Lamb standing as though slaughtered, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent into all the earth. 7 And he came and took the scroll from the right hand of the one who was seated on the throne. 8 And when he took the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each one of whom had a harp and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints. 9 And they were singing a new song, saying, 
“You are worthy to take the scroll 
and to open its seals, 
because you were slaughtered, 
and bought people for God by your blood 
from every tribe and language and people and nation, 
10 and made them a kingdom and priests to our God, 
and they will reign on the earth.” 
11 And I looked, and I heard the voice of many angels around the throne and of the living creatures and of the elders, and their number was ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands times thousands, 12 saying with a loud voice, 
“Worthy is the Lamb who was slaughtered 
to receive power and riches 
and wisdom and strength 
and honor and glory and praise!” 
13 And I heard every creature that is in heaven and on the earth and under the earth and in the sea and everything in them saying, 
“To the one who is seated on the throne and to the Lamb 
be praise and honor and glory and power 
⌊forever and ever⌋.” 
14 And the four living creatures were saying, “Amen!” and the elders fell down and worshiped. 
The Opening of the First Six Seals
6 And I watched when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying like the sound of thunder, “Come!” 2 And I looked, and behold, a white horse, and the one seated on it had a bow, and a crown was given to him, and he went out conquering and in order that he might conquer. 
3 And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, “Come!” 4 And another horse came out, fiery red, and it was granted to the one seated on it to take peace from the earth, and that they would slaughter one another, and a large sword was given to him. 
5 And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, “Come!” And I looked, and behold, a black horse, and the one seated on it had a balance scale in his hand. 6 And I heard something like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, “A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius, and do not damage the olive oil and the wine!” 
7 And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard a voice from the fourth living creature saying, “Come!” 8 And I looked, and behold, a pale green horse, and the one seated on it ⌊was named⌋ Death, and Hades followed after him. And authority was granted to them over a fourth of the earth, to kill by the sword and by famine and by pestilence and by the wild beasts of the earth. 
9 And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slaughtered because of the word of God and because of the testimony which they had, 10 and they cried out with a loud voice, saying, “⌊How long⌋, holy and true Lord, will you not judge and avenge our blood from those who live on the earth?” 11 And to each one of them a white robe was given, and it was said to them that they should rest yet a short time, until the number of their fellow slaves and their brothers who were about to be killed as they had been were completed also. 
12 And I watched when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake took place, and the sun became black like sackcloth made of hair, and the whole moon became like blood, 13 and the stars of heaven fell to the earth like a fig tree throws down its unripe figs when﻿* shaken by a great wind. 14 And the sky was split apart like a scroll that is rolled up, and every mountain and island were moved from their place. 15 And the kings of the earth, and the most important people, and the military leaders, and the rich, and the powerful, and every slave and free person hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains, 16 And they said to the mountains and to the rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face of the one who is seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, 17 because the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?” 
The Sealing of the 144,000
7 After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of the earth, so that no wind could blow on the earth or on the sea or on any tree. 2 And I saw another angel ascending ⌊from the east⌋, holding the seal of the living God, and he cried out with a loud voice to the four angels ⌊who were given permission⌋ to damage the earth and the sea, 3 saying, “Do not damage the earth or the sea or the trees until we have sealed the slaves of our God on their foreheads.” 4 And I heard the number of the ones who were sealed, one hundred forty-four thousand sealed from every tribe of the sons of Israel: 
5 from the tribe of Judah, twelve thousand sealed, 
from the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand, 
6 from the tribe of Asher, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Naphtali, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Manasseh, twelve thousand, 
7 from the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Issachar, twelve thousand, 
8 from the tribe of Zebulun, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Joseph, twelve thousand, 
from the tribe of Benjamin, twelve thousand were sealed. 
The Great Crowd before the Throne
9 After these things I looked, and behold, a great crowd that no one was able to number, from every nation and tribe and people and language, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes and with palm branches in their hands. 10 And they were crying out with a loud voice, saying, 
“Salvation to our God 
who is seated on the throne, 
and to the Lamb!” 
11 And all the angels stood around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell down on their faces before the throne and worshiped God, 12 saying, 
“Amen! Praise and glory, 
and wisdom and thanksgiving, 
and honor and power and strength 
be to our God ⌊forever and ever⌋. Amen!” 
13 And one of the elders answered, saying to me, “These who are dressed in the white robes—who are they, and from where have they come?” 14 And I said to him, “My lord, you know.” And he said to me, 
“These are the ones who have come out of the great tribulation, 
and have washed their robes 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 
15 Because of this, they are before the throne of God, 
and they serve him day and night in his temple, 
and the one who is seated on the throne ⌊will shelter⌋ them. 
16 They will not be hungry any longer or be thirsty any longer, 
nor will the sun ever beat down on them, nor any heat, 
17 because the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne will shepherd them 
and will lead them to springs of living waters, 
and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.” 
The Opening of the Seventh Seal
8 And when he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour. 2 And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. 3 And another angel who had a golden censer came and stood at the altar, and a large amount of incense was given to him, in order that he could offer the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar that is before the throne. 4 And the smoke of the incense went up before God with the prayers of the saints from the hand of the angel. 5 And the angel took the censer and filled it with the fire from the altar and threw it to the earth, and there were thunders and sounds and lightnings and an earthquake. 
The Blowing of the Trumpets
6 And the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves in order to blow them. 
7 And the first blew the trumpet, and there was hail and fire mixed with blood, and it was thrown to the earth, and a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green grass was burned up. 
8 And the second angel blew the trumpet, and something like a great mountain burning with fire was thrown into the sea, and a third of the sea became blood, 9 and a third of the creatures in the sea—the ones which had life—died, and a third of the ships were destroyed. 
10 And the third angel blew the trumpet, and a great star burning like a torch fell from heaven, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water. 11 And the name of the star was called Wormwood, and a third of the waters became wormwood, and many people died from the waters because they were made bitter. 
12 And the fourth angel blew the trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them were darkened, and the day did not shine with respect to a third of it, and the night likewise. 
13 And I looked, and I heard one eagle flying ⌊directly overhead⌋, saying with a loud voice, “Woe, woe, woe to those who live on the earth, from the remaining sounds of the trumpets of the three angels who are about to blow the trumpet!” 
Tormenting Locusts from the Abyss
9 And the fifth angel blew the trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to the earth, and the key of the shaft of the abyss was given to him. 2 And he opened the shaft of the abyss, and smoke went up from the shaft like smoke from a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by the smoke from the shaft. 3 And out of the smoke locusts came to the earth, and power was given to them like the scorpions of the earth have power. 4 And it was told to them that they should not damage the grass of the earth or any green plant or any tree, except those people who do not have the seal of God on their﻿* foreheads. 5 And it was granted to them that they should not kill them, but that they would be tormented five months, and their torment is like the torment of a scorpion when it stings a person. 6 And in those days people will seek death and will never find it, and they will long to die, and death will flee from them. 
7 And the appearance of the locusts was like horses prepared for battle, and on their heads were something like crowns similar in appearance to gold, and their faces were like men’s faces, 8 and they had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were like the teeth of lions, 9 and they had breastplates like iron breastplates, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many ⌊horse-drawn chariots⌋ running into battle. 10 And they have tails similar in appearance to scorpions, and stings, and their power to injure people for five months is in their tails. 11 They have as king over them the angel of the abyss, ⌊whose name⌋ in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he has the name Apollyon. 
12 The first woe has passed. Behold, two woes are still coming after these things. 
A Third of Humanity Killed by Plagues
13 And the sixth angel blew the trumpet, and I heard one voice from the horns of the golden altar that is before God 14 saying to the sixth angel, the one who had the trumpet, “Release the four angels who have been bound at the great river Euphrates!” 15 And the four angels who had been prepared for the hour and day and month and year were released, in order that they should kill a third of humanity. 16 And the number of the troops of the cavalry was ⌊two hundred million⌋; I heard the number of them. 17 And in this way I saw the horses in the vision, and those seated on them, who had fiery red and hyacinth-colored and sulphurous yellow breastplates, and the heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and out of their mouths came fire and smoke and sulphur. 18 By these three plagues a third of humanity was killed—by the fire and the smoke and the sulphur that came out of their mouths. 19 For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails, for their tails are similar in appearance to snakes, having heads, and with them they cause injury. 
20 And the rest of humanity who were not killed by these plagues did not repent of the works of their hands, ⌊in order not to worship⌋ the demons and the gold and silver and bronze and stone and wooden idols, which are able neither to see nor to hear nor to walk, 21 and they did not repent of their murders or of their magic spells or of their sexual immorality or of their thefts. 
The Angel and the Little Scroll
10 And I saw another powerful angel descending from heaven, wrapped in a cloud, and a rainbow over his head, and his face was like the sun, and his feet were like pillars of fire, 2 and holding in his hand a little scroll that was opened. And he put his right foot on the sea and his﻿* left on the land. 3 And he cried out with a loud voice like a lion roars, and when he cried out, the seven thunders sounded their own voices. 4 And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write, and I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Seal up the things which the seven thunders spoke, and do not write them!” 
5 And the angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven 6 and swore by the one who lives ⌊forever and ever⌋, who created heaven and the things in it, and the earth and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, “There will be no more delay! 7 But in the days of the sound of the seventh angel, whenever he is about to blow the trumpet, then the mystery of God is completed, as he announced to his own slaves the prophets.” 
8 And the voice that I had heard from heaven was speaking with me again and saying, “Go, take the opened scroll in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.” 9 And I went to the angel and told him to give me the little scroll, and he said to me, “Take and eat it up, and it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.” 10 And I took the little scroll from the hand of the angel and ate it up, and it was sweet as honey in my mouth, and when I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter. 11 And they said to me, “It is necessary for you to prophesy again about many peoples and nations and languages and kings.” 
The Two Witnesses
11 And a measuring rod similar in appearance to a staff was given to me, saying, “Get up and measure the temple of God and the altar and those who worship in it. 2 And leave out the courtyard outside of the temple, and do not measure it, because it has been given to the Gentiles, and they will trample the holy city for forty two months. 3 And I will grant authority﻿* to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for one thousand two hundred sixty days, dressed in sackcloth.” 4 These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of the earth. 5 And if anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouth and consumes their enemies. And if anyone wants to harm them, in this way he must be killed. 6 These have the authority to shut the sky, so that ⌊it does not rain⌋ during the days of their prophecy. And they have authority over the waters, to turn them to blood, and to strike the earth with every plague as often as they wish. 
7 And when they have completed their testimony, the beast that comes up from the abyss will make war with them and will conquer them and will kill them. 8 And their dead bodies will lie in the street of the great city which is called symbolically Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified. 9 And those from peoples and tribes and languages and nations will see their dead bodies three and a half days, and they will not allow their dead bodies to be placed in a tomb. 10 And those who live on the earth will rejoice over them, and will celebrate and will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those who live on the earth. 
11 And after the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell on those who saw them. 12 And they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “Come up here,” and they went up into heaven in a cloud, and their enemies watched them. 13 And at that hour a great earthquake took place, and a tenth of the city collapsed, and seven thousand ⌊people⌋ were killed by the earthquake, and the rest became terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven. 14 The second woe has passed. Behold, the third woe is coming quickly! 
The Blowing of the Seventh Trumpet
15 And the seventh angel blew the trumpet, and there was a loud voice in heaven saying, 
“The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord 
and of his Christ, 
and he will reign ⌊forever and ever⌋.” 
16 And the twenty-four elders who are seated on their thrones before God fell down on their faces and worshiped God, 17 saying, 
“We give thanks to you, Lord God All-Powerful, 
the one who is and the one who was, 
because you have taken your great power 
and have begun to reign. 
18 And the nations were angry, 
and your wrath has come, 
and the time for the dead to be judged, 
and to give their﻿* reward to your slaves the prophets 
and to the saints and to the ones who fear your name, 
the small and the great, 
and to destroy those who destroy the earth.” 
19 And the temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant appeared in his temple, and there were lightnings and sounds and thunders and an earthquake and large hail. 
The Woman and Her Son Versus the Dragon
12 And a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun and with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars, 2 and ⌊who was pregnant⌋ and was crying out because she﻿* was having birth pains, and was in torment to give birth. 3 And another sign appeared in heaven, and behold, a great fiery red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads were seven royal headbands. 4 And his tail swept away a third of the stars from heaven and threw them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, in order that whenever she gave birth to her child he could devour it. 5 And she gave birth to a son, a male child, who is going to shepherd all the nations with an iron rod, and her child was snatched away to God and to his throne. 6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared there by God, so that they could feed her there for one thousand two hundred sixty days. 
Satan Thrown Down from Heaven to Earth
7 And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels ⌊fought against⌋ the dragon, and the dragon and his angels ⌊fought back⌋. 8 And they did not prevail, nor was a place found for them any longer in heaven. 9 And the great dragon was thrown down, the ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world. He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him. 
10 And I heard a loud voice in heaven saying, 
“Now the salvation and the power 
and the kingdom of our God 
and the authority of his Christ have come, 
because the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down, 
the one who accuses them before our God day and night. 
11 And they conquered him by the blood of the Lamb 
and by the word of their testimony, 
and they did not love their lives until death. 
12 Because of this, rejoice, you heavens, 
and those who live in them! 
Woe to the earth and to the sea, 
because the devil has come down to you, 
having great anger, 
because he﻿* knows that he has little time!” 
13 And when the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child. 14 And the two wings of a great eagle were given to the woman, in order that she could fly into the wilderness, to her place where she is fed there for a time, and times, and half a time, from the presence of the serpent. 15 And from his mouth the serpent spouted water like a river after the woman, in order that he could make her swept away by a river. 16 And the earth came to the aid of the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river that the dragon had spouted out of his mouth. 17 And the dragon was angry at the woman, and went away to ⌊fight against⌋ the rest of her children, those who keep the commandments of God and who hold to the testimony about Jesus. 18 And he stood on the sand of the sea. 
The First Beast from the Sea
13 And I saw coming up out of the sea a beast that had ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns ten royal headbands, and on its heads a blasphemous name. 2 And the beast that I saw was similar to a leopard, and its feet were like a bear’s, and its mouth was like the mouth of a lion, and the dragon gave it his power and his throne and great authority. 3 And one of its heads appeared as though slaughtered to death, and its ⌊fatal wound⌋ had been healed. And the whole earth was astonished and followed after the beast. 4 And they worshiped the dragon because he had given authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast, and who is able to make war with him? 
5 And a mouth was given to him speaking great things and blasphemies, and authority to act was given to him for forty-two months. 6 And he opened his mouth for blasphemies toward God, to blaspheme his name and his dwelling, those who live in heaven. 7 And it was given to him to make war with the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given to him over every tribe and people and language and nation. 8 And all those who live on the earth will worship him, ⌊everyone whose name is not written⌋ from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slaughtered. 9 If anyone has an ear, let him hear! 
10 If anyone is going into captivity, into captivity he goes. 
If anyone is to be killed by the sword, by the sword he is to be killed. 
Here is the patient endurance and the faith of the saints. 
The Second Beast from the Earth
11 And I saw another beast coming up from the earth, and he had two horns like a lamb, and he was speaking like a dragon. 12 And he exercises all the authority of the first beast on behalf of him, and he causes the earth and those who live in it to worship the first beast ⌊whose fatal wound had been healed⌋. 13 And he performs great signs, so that he even causes fire from heaven to come down to the earth before people. 14 And he deceives those who live on the earth because of the signs that it has been granted to him to perform on behalf of the beast, telling those who live on the earth to make an image to the beast who has the wound of the sword and yet lived. 15 And it was given to him to put breath into the image of the beast, in order that the image of the beast both spoke and caused that all those, unless they worshiped the image of the beast, should be killed. 16 And he causes all people, the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the slave, that they give them a mark on their right hand or on their forehead, 17 and that no one was able to buy or to sell except the one who had the mark—the name of the beast or the number of his name. 18 Here is wisdom: the one who has understanding, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is man’s number, and his number is six hundred sixty-six. 
The Lamb and the 144,000 on Mount Zion
14 And I looked, and behold, the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him one hundred forty-four thousand who had his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. 2 And I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder, and the sound that I heard was like harpists playing on their harps. 3 And they were singing something like a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and no one was able to learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand who had been bought from the earth. 
4 These are those who have not been defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are the ones who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were bought from humanity as first fruits to God and to the Lamb, 5 and in their mouth a lie was not found; they are blameless. 
The Three Angels and Their Messages
6 And I saw another angel flying ⌊directly overhead⌋, having an eternal gospel to proclaim to those who reside on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and language and people, 7 saying with a loud voice, “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come, and worship the one who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and the springs of water!” 
8 And another second angel followed, saying, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, who caused all the nations to drink from the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality.” 
9 And another third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, “If anyone worships the beast and his image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand, 10 he himself also will drink of the wine of the anger of God that has been mixed full strength in the cup of his wrath, and will be tortured with fire and sulphur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb. 11 And the smoke of their torture went up ⌊forever and ever⌋, and those who worshiped the beast and his image did not have rest day and night, ⌊along with anyone who received⌋ the mark of his name. 12 Here is the patient endurance of the saints, those who keep the commandments of God and the faith in Jesus. 
13 And I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Write: 
‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on!’ ” 
“Yes,” says the Spirit, “in order that they may rest from their labors, for their deeds follow after them.” 
The Earth is Harvested
14 And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and on the cloud was seated one like a son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. 15 And another angel came out of the temple, crying out with a loud voice to the one seated on the cloud, “Send out your sickle and reap, because the hour to reap has come, because the harvest of the earth is ripe!” 16 And the one seated on the cloud swung his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped. 
17 And another angel came out of the temple that is in heaven; he also had a sharp sickle. 18 And another angel who had authority over the fire went out from the altar, and he called out with a loud voice to the one who had the sharp sickle, saying, “Send out your sharp sickle and harvest the clusters of grapes from the vine of the earth, because its grapes are at their prime!” 19 And the angel swung his sickle into the earth and harvested the vine of the earth, and threw the grapes﻿* into the great winepress of the wrath of God. 20 And the winepress was stomped outside the city, and blood went out from the winepress up to the bridles of the horses, about one thousand six hundred stadia. 
Seven Angels with Seven Last Plagues
15 And I saw another great and marvelous sign in heaven: seven angels having seven plagues that are the last ones, because with them the wrath of God is completed. 2 And I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who had conquered the beast and his image and the number of his name were standing by the glassy sea, holding harps from God. 3 And they were singing the song of Moses, the slave of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying: 
“Great and marvelous are your works, 
Lord God All-Powerful; 
righteous and true are your ways, 
King of the ages! 
4 Who would never fear, Lord, 
and glorify your name? 
For only you are holy, 
because all the nations will come 
and worship before you, 
because your righteous deeds have been revealed.” 
5 And after these things I looked, and the temple, the tent of the testimony in heaven, was opened, 6 and the seven angels who had the seven plagues came out from the temple, dressed in clean, bright linen garments, and girded with golden belts around their﻿* chests. 7 And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives ⌊forever and ever⌋, 8 and the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power, and no one was able to enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed. 
The Seven Bowls of the Wrath of God
16 And I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go and pour out on the earth the seven bowls of the wrath of God.” 2 And the first went and poured out his bowl on the earth, and there was an evil and painful sore on the people who had the mark of the beast and who worshiped his image. 
3 And the second poured out his bowl on the sea, and it became blood, like that of a dead person, and every living thing that was in the sea died. 
4 And the third poured out his bowl on the rivers and the springs of water, and they became blood. 5 And I heard the angel of the waters saying, 
“You are righteous, the one who is and the one who was, the Holy One, 
because you have judged these things, 
6 because they have poured out the blood of the saints and prophets, 
and you have given them blood to drink; 
they are deserving!” 
7 And I heard the altar saying, 
“Yes, Lord God All-Powerful, 
true and righteous are your judgments.” 
8 And the fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was granted to it to burn up people with fire. 9 And people were burned up by the great heat, and they blasphemed the name of God who has the authority over these plagues, and they did not repent to give him glory. 
10 And the fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and his kingdom became darkened, and they began chewing their tongues because of the pain. 11 And they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pain and because of their sores, and they did not repent of their deeds. 
12 And the sixth poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up, in order that the way would be prepared for the kings from ⌊the east⌋. 13 And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet three unclean spirits like frogs. 14 For they are the spirits of demons performing signs that go out to the kings of the whole inhabited world, to gather them for the battle of the great day of God the All-Powerful. 15 (Behold, I am coming like a thief. Blessed is the one who is on the alert and who keeps his clothing, so that he does not walk around naked and they see his shamefulness!) 16 And he gathered them to the place called in Hebrew Armageddon. 
17 And the seventh poured out his bowl on the air, and a loud voice came out of the temple, from the throne, saying, “It is done!” 18 And there were lightnings and sounds and thunders, and there was a great earthquake, as has not happened from the time humanity has been on the earth—so great in this way was the earthquake. 19 And the great city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. And Babylon the great was remembered before God, to give her the cup of the wine of his furious wrath. 20 And every island fled, and mountains were not found. 21 And large hailstones, weighing about a hundred pounds, came down from the sky upon people, and the people blasphemed God because of the plague of hail, because the plague of it was very great. 
The Judgment of the Great Prostitute Babylon
17 And one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, “Come, I will show you the judgment of the great prostitute who is seated on many waters, 2 with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality, and those who live on the earth became drunk with the wine of her sexual immorality.” 3 And he carried me away into the wilderness in the Spirit, and I saw a woman seated on a scarlet beast that was full of blasphemous names, having seven heads and ten horns. 4 And the woman was dressed in purple and scarlet and adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls, holding a golden cup in her hand full of detestable things and the unclean things of her sexual immorality. 5 And on her forehead a name was written, a mystery: “Babylon the great, the mother of prostitutes and of the detestable things of the earth.” 6 And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints and with the blood of the witnesses to Jesus. 
And ⌊I was greatly astonished when I saw her⌋. 7 And the angel said to me, “Why are you astonished? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast that has the seven heads and the ten horns that carries her. 8 The beast that you saw was, and is not, and is going to come up from the abyss, and he is going to destruction. And those who live on the earth, whose names are not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, will be astonished when they﻿* see the beast that was, and is not, and will be present. 9 Here is the mind that has wisdom: the seven heads are seven mountains ⌊on which the woman sits⌋ and they are seven kings. 10 Five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come, and whenever he comes it is necessary for him to remain a short time. 11 And the beast that was, and is not, is also himself an eighth, and is of the seven, and he is going to destruction. 12 And the ten horns that you saw are ten kings, who have not yet received a kingdom, but they will receive authority as kings for one hour with the beast. 13 These have one opinion, and they will give their power and authority to the beast. 14 These will make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb will conquer them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, and those with him are called and chosen and faithful.” 
15 And he said to me, “The waters that you saw, where the prostitute is seated, are peoples and crowds and nations and languages. 16 And the ten horns that you saw and the beast, these will hate the prostitute and will make her desolate and naked, and they will eat her flesh and will burn her up with fire. 17 For God put into their hearts to carry out his purpose and to make ⌊a unanimous decision⌋ and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God are fulfilled. 18 And the woman that you saw is the great city that has sovereignty over the kings of the earth. 
Lament Over Babylon the Great
18 After these things I saw another angel descending from heaven, who had great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his splendor. 2 And he cried out with a powerful voice, saying, 
“Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, 
and it has become a dwelling place of demons 
and a haunt of every unclean spirit 
and a haunt of every unclean bird 
and a haunt of every unclean and detested animal. 
3 For all the nations have drunk 
from the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality, 
and the kings of the earth have committed sexual immorality with her, 
and the merchants of the earth have become rich 
from the power of her sensuality.” 
4 And I heard another voice from heaven saying, 
“Come out from her, my people, 
so that you will not participate in her sins, 
and so that you will not receive her plagues, 
5 because her sins have reached up to heaven, 
and God has remembered her crimes. 
6 Pay back to her as she herself also paid out, 
and ⌊pay back double⌋ according to her deeds; 
in the cup that she mixed, mix double for her. 
7 As much as she glorified herself and lived in luxury, 
give to her so much torment and mourning, 
because in her heart she said, 
‘I sit as a queen, and am not a widow, 
and I will never see mourning!’ 
8 Because of this her plagues will come in one day— 
death and mourning and famine— 
and she will be burned up with fire, 
because the Lord God who passes judgment on her is powerful!” 
9 And the kings of the earth will weep and mourn over her, those who committed sexual immorality and lived sensually with her, when they see the smoke of her burning, 10 standing ⌊far off⌋ because of the fear of her torment, saying, 
“Woe, woe, the great city, 
Babylon the powerful city, 
because in one hour your judgment has come!” 
11 And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, because no one buys their cargo any more—12 cargo of gold and silver and precious stones and pearls and fine linen and purple cloth and silk and scarlet cloth and all kinds of scented wood and all kinds of ivory goods and all kinds of goods of precious wood and bronze and iron and marble 13 and cinnamon and amomum and incense and ointment and frankincense and wine and olive oil and fine wheat flour and wheat and domesticated animals and sheep and horses and carriages and ⌊slaves⌋ and human lives. 
14 “And ⌊the fruit your soul desires⌋ has departed from you, 
and all the luxury and the splendor has perished from you, 
and they will never find them any more.” 
15 The merchants of these things, who became rich from them, will stand ⌊far off⌋, weeping and mourning because of the fear of her torment, 16 saying, 
“Woe, woe, the great city, 
dressed in fine linen and purple cloth and scarlet cloth, 
and adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls, 
17 because in one hour such great wealth has been laid waste!” 
And every shipmaster and ⌊every seafarer⌋ and sailors and all those who labor on the sea stood ⌊far off⌋ 18 and began to cry out when they﻿* saw the smoke of her burning, saying, “Who is like the great city?” 19 And they threw dust on their heads and were crying out, weeping and mourning, saying, 
“Woe, woe, the great city, 
in which all those who had ships on the sea 
became rich from her prosperity, 
because in one hour she has been laid waste!” 
20 Rejoice over her, heaven 
and the saints and the apostles and the prophets, 
because God has pronounced your judgment on her!” 
21 And one powerful angel picked up a stone like a great millstone and threw it into the sea, saying, 
“In this way Babylon the great city will be thrown down with violence, 
and will never be found again! 
22 And the sound of harpists and musicians and flute players and trumpeters 
will never be heard in you again! 
And every craftsman of every trade 
will never be found in you again! 
And the sound of a mill 
will never be heard in you again! 
23 And the light of a lamp 
will never shine in you again! 
And the sound of a bridegroom and bride 
will never be heard in you again! 
For your merchants were the most important people of the earth, 
because with your sorcery they deceived all the nations. 
24 And in her was found the blood of prophets and saints 
and all those who had been slaughtered on the earth. 
Rejoicing in Heaven
19 After these things I heard something like the loud sound of a great crowd in heaven saying, 
“Hallelujah! 
Salvation and glory and power belong to our God, 
2 because his judgments are true and righteous, 
because he has passed judgment on the great prostitute 
who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, 
and has avenged the blood of his slaves ⌊shed by⌋ her hand!” 
3 And a second time they said, 
“Hallelujah!” 
And her smoke goes up ⌊forever and ever⌋. 4 And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who is seated on the throne, saying, 
“Amen! Hallelujah!” 
5 And a voice came out from the throne, saying, 
“Praise our God 
all his slaves, 
and those who fear him, 
the small and the great!” 
The Wedding Celebration of the Lamb
6 And I heard something like the sound of a great crowd and something like the sound of many waters and something like the sound of powerful thunder, saying, 
“Hallelujah! 
For the Lord God, the All-Powerful, reigns! 
7 Let us rejoice and be glad 
and give him the glory, 
because the wedding celebration of the Lamb has come, 
and his bride has prepared herself. 
8 And it has been granted to her that she be dressed in bright, clean fine linen (for the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the saints). 
9 And he said to me, “Write: Blessed are those who are invited to the banquet of the wedding celebration of the Lamb!” And he said to me, “These are the true words of God.” 10 And I fell down before his feet to worship him, and he said to me, “⌊Do not do that!⌋ I am a fellow slave of you and of your brothers who hold to the testimony of Jesus. Worship God! For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.” 
The Warrior on the White Horse
11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and the one seated on it was called “Faithful” and “True,” and with justice he judges and makes war. 12 Now his eyes were a flame of fire, and on his head were many royal headbands having a name written that no one except he himself knows. 13 And he was dressed in an outer garment dipped in blood, and his name is called the Word of God. 14 And the armies that are in heaven, dressed in clean, white fine linen, were following him on white horses. 15 And out of his mouth came a sharp sword, so that with it he could strike the nations. And he will shepherd them with an iron rod, and he stomps the winepress of the wine of the furious wrath of God, the All-Powerful. 16 And he has a name written on his outer garment and on his thigh: “King of kings and Lord of lords.” 
17 And I saw one angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly ⌊directly overhead⌋, 
“Come! Assemble for the great banquet of God, 
18 in order that you may eat the flesh of kings, 
and the flesh of military tribunes, 
and the flesh of the powerful, 
and the flesh of horses and those seated on them, 
and the flesh of all people, 
both free and slave, 
and small and great!” 
19 And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies assembled to make war with the one who is seated on the horse and with his army. 20 And the beast was seized, and with him the false prophet who performed the signs before him, by which he deceived those who received the mark of the beast and those who had worshiped his image. The two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulphur. 21 And the rest were killed by the sword of the one who is seated on the horse—the sword that comes out of his mouth—and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh. 
Satan Bound for a Thousand Years
20 And I saw an angel descending from heaven, holding the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand. 2 And he seized the dragon—the ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan—and bound him for a thousand years, 3 and threw him into the abyss, and shut it and sealed it above him, in order that he could not deceive the nations again until the thousand years are completed. After these things it is necessary for him to be released for a short time. 
4 And I saw thrones, and they sat down on them, and authority to judge was granted to them. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony about Jesus and because of the word of God, and who had not worshiped the beast or his image, and did not receive the mark on their﻿* forehead and on their hand, and they came to life and reigned with Christ for a thousand years. 5 (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were completed.) This is the first resurrection. 6 Blessed and holy is the one who has a part in the first resurrection. Over this person the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and they will reign with him a thousand years. 
Satan’s Release and Defeat
7 And when the thousand years are completed, Satan will be released from his prison 8 and he will go out to deceive the nations that are at the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to assemble them for battle, ⌊whose number⌋ is like the sand of the sea. 9 And they went up on the broad plain of the earth and surrounded the fortified camp of the saints and the beloved city, and fire came down from heaven and consumed them. 10 And the devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulphur, where the beast and the false prophet also are, and they will be tormented day and night ⌊forever and ever⌋. 
The Judgment at the Great White Throne
11 And I saw a great white throne and the one who was seated on it, ⌊from whose presence⌋ earth and heaven fled, and a place was not found for them. 12 And I saw the dead—the great and the small—standing before the throne, and books were opened. And another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to their deeds. 13 And the sea gave up the dead who were in it, and Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and each one was judged according to their deeds. 14 And Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death—the lake of fire. 15 And if anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire. 
The New Heaven, New Earth, and New Jerusalem
21 And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea did not exist any longer. 2 And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband. 3 And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, 
“Behold, the dwelling of God is with humanity, 
and he will take up residence with them, 
and they will be his people 
and God himself will be with them. 
4 And he will wipe away every tear from their eyes, 
and death will not exist any longer, 
and mourning or wailing or pain will not exist any longer. 
The former things have passed away.” 
5 And the one seated on the throne said, “Behold, I am making all things new!” And he said, “Write, because these words are faithful and true.” 6 And he said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To the one who is thirsty I will give water from the spring of the water of life freely. 7 The one who conquers will inherit these things, and I will be ⌊his God⌋ and he will be ⌊my son⌋. 8 But as for the cowards and unbelievers and detestable persons and murderers and sexually immoral people and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, their share is in the lake that burns with fire and sulphur, which is the second death. 
A Description of the New Jerusalem
9 And one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came and spoke with me, saying, “Come, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb.” 10 And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and lofty mountain, and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, 11 that has the glory of God. Its radiance is like a precious stone, something like a jasper stone, shining like crystal. 12 It has a great and high wall that has twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written on the gates which are of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel—13 on the east, three gates, and on the north, three gates, and on the south, three gates, and on the west, three gates. 14 And the wall of the city has twelve foundations, and on them are twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. 
15 And the one who spoke with me was holding a golden measuring rod in order that he could measure the city and its gates and its wall. 16 And the city is laid out as a square, and its length is the same as its width. And he measured the city with the measuring rod at twelve thousand stadia; the length and the width and the height of it are equal. 17 And he measured its wall, one hundred forty-four cubits ⌊according to human measure⌋, which is the angel’s. 18 And the material of its wall is jasper, and the city is pure gold, similar in appearance to pure glass. 19 The foundations of the wall of the city are adorned with every kind of precious stone: the first foundation jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald, 20 the fifth sardonyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth amethyst. 21 And the twelve gates are twelve pearls, each one of the gates was from a single pearl. And the street of the city is pure gold, like transparent glass. 
22 And I did not see a temple in it, for the Lord God All-Powerful is its temple, and the Lamb. 23 And the city has no need of the sun or of the moon, that they shine on it, for the glory of God illuminates it, and its lamp is the Lamb. 24 And the nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory into it. 25 And its gates will never be shut by day (for there will be no night there), 26 and they will bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it. 27 And every unclean thing and one who practices detestable things and falsehood will never enter into it, except those who are written in the book of life of the Lamb. 
Paradise Restored
22 And he showed me the river of the water of life, clear as crystal, coming out from the throne of God and of the Lamb 2 in the middle of its street, and ⌊on both sides of the river⌋ is the tree of life, producing twelve fruits—yielding its fruit according to every month—and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. 3 And there will not be any curse any longer, and the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his slaves will serve him, 4 and they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. 5 And night will not exist any longer, and they will not have need of the light of a lamp and the light of the sun, because the Lord God will give light to them, and they will reign ⌊forever and ever⌋. 
The Time of Fulfillment is Near
6 And he said to me, “These words are faithful and true, and the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his slaves the things which must take place in a short time.” 
7 “And behold, I am coming quickly! Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.” 
8 And I, John, am the one who heard and who saw these things. And when I heard and saw them, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who showed these things to me. 9 And he said to me, “⌊Do not do that!⌋ I am your fellow slave, and of your brothers the prophets, and of those who keep the words of this book. Worship God!” 10 And he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near! 11 The one who does evil, let him do evil still, and the defiled, let him be defiled still, and the righteous, let him practice righteousness still, and the holy, let him be holy still.” 
12 “Behold, I am coming quickly, and my reward is with me, to repay each one according to what his deeds are! 13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.” 
14 Blessed are the ones who wash their robes, so that their authority will be over the tree of life and they may enter into the city through the gates. 15 Outside are the dogs and the sorcerers and the sexually immoral people and the murderers and the idolaters and everyone who loves and who practices falsehood. 
16 “I, Jesus, sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star.” 
An Invitation to Respond
17 And the Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And the one who hears, let him say, “Come!” And the one who is thirsty, let him come. The one who wants, let him take the water of life freely. 
A Final Warning
18 I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues written in this book. 19 And if anyone takes away from the words of this book of prophecy, God will take away his share of the tree of life and from the holy city that are written in this book. 
20 The one who testifies about these things says, “Yes, I am coming quickly!” Amen! Come, Lord Jesus! 
21 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.
